READING SKILLS
TEXT ANALYSIS
10
When you read a text, you form an opinion. Understanding how writers present 
ideas is key to understanding how texts work. You need to be aware of a 
variety of ways in which writers use language to influence their readers. The 
devices used tend to be linked to the purpose of the text. So a text which 
tries to persuade a reader of a particular opinion will use rhetorical devices, 
while a text which describes another country is likely to use a wide range of 
descriptive and figurative devices to establish a vivid sense of place. 
When you read a new piece of non-fiction, you should first try to understand 
what points are being made. 
This section will help you to prepare for Paper 1 Section A, which 
will test your reading and critical skills. There will be questions on 
both a prepared and an unprepared non-fiction reading passage. 
This will be drawn from a range of contemporary non-fiction, 
including autobiography, travel writing, reportage, media articles, 
letters, diary entries and opinion pieces. You will find additional 
information on this section of the examination on pages xx-xx.
EVALUATING A TEXT
▶
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
approach a non-fiction text 
critically
 
◼
recognise fact and opinion and 
follow an argument
 
◼
build confidence in responding 
to a text 
 
◼
understand how writers use 
language to influence their 
readers.
EVALUATING A TEXT: A GUIDE
▶
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
rhetorical device - using language in a 
certain way to achieve an effect
▼  ‘IT’S SO OVER: COOL CYBERKIDS ABANDON SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES’ FROM THE 
GUARDIAN
From uncles wearing skinny jeans to mothers investing in ra-ra skirts and fathers nodding awkwardly along to the 
latest grime record, the older generation has long known that the surest way to kill a youth trend is to adopt it as its 
own. The cyberworld, it seems, is no exception.
The proliferation of parents and teachers trawling the pages of Facebook trying to poke old schoolfriends and 
lovers, and traversing the outer reaches of MySpace is causing an adolescent exodus from the social networking 
sites, according to research from the media regulator Ofcom.
The sites, once the virtual streetcorners, pubs and clubs for millions of 15- to 24-year-olds, have now been over-run 
by 25- to 34-year-olds whose presence is driving their younger peers away.
Although their love of being online shows no sign of abating, the percentage of 15- to 24-year-olds who have a 
profile on a social networking site has dropped for the first time – from 55% at the start of last year to 50% this 
year. In contrast, 46% of 25- to 34-year-olds are now regularly checking up on sites such as Facebook compared 
with 40% last year.
Overall, 30% of British adults have a social networking profile, against 21% in 2007 when Ofcom first did the 
research. Half the UK's online population have a Facebook profile and spend an average of nearly six hours a 
month on the site compared with four hours in May 2008.
“There is nothing to suggest overall usage of the internet among 15-to 24-year-olds is going down,” said Peter 
Phillips, the regulator’s head of strategy. “Data suggests they are spending less time on social networking sites.”
James Thickett, director of market research at Ofcom, said that while older people seemed to be embracing social 
networking sites, Facebook and MySpace remained immensely popular with children under 16.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
TEXT ANALYSIS
11
Read the article taken from The Guardian newspaper. Complete two lists: one listing the facts used in this article 
and one listing the opinions. How do the use of the facts and opinions influence us?
Next, pull out the key arguments of this article and re-write each point in your own words. Summarise the article 
in five or six key points.
▼ RECOGNISING FACT AND OPINION AND FOLLOWING AN ARGUMENT
ACTIVITY 1
“Clearly take-up among under 16-year-olds is very high … so we cannot say for certain whether this is people 
in a certain age group who are not setting up social networking profiles or whether it’s a population shift which 
is reflecting people getting older and having a social networking profile that they set up two years ago,” he said. 
“The main point is the profile of social networking users is getting older.”
The arrival of the 25- to 34-year-old age group, meanwhile, also appears to be behind the explosion in usage of 
Twitter.
▶
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
▼  ‘SOCIAL WEBSITES HARM CHILDREN’S BRAIN’ FROM MAIL ONLINE
Social networking websites are causing alarming changes in the brains of young users, an eminent scientist has warned.
Sites such as Facebook, Twitter and Bebo are said to shorten attention spans, encourage instant gratification and make 
young people more self-centred.
The claims from neuroscientist Susan Greenfield will make disturbing reading for the millions whose social lives depend 
on logging on to their favourite websites each day.
But they will strike a chord with parents and teachers who complain that many youngsters lack the ability to 
communicate or concentrate away from their screens.
More than 150 million use Facebook to keep in touch with friends, share photographs and videos and post regular 
updates of their movements and thoughts.
A further six million have signed up to Twitter, the ‘micro-blogging’ service that lets users circulate text messages about 
themselves.
But while the sites are popular – and extremely profitable – a growing number of psychologists and neuroscientists 
believe they may be doing more harm than good.
Baroness Greenfield, an Oxford University neuroscientist and director of the Royal Institution, believes repeated 
exposure could effectively ‘rewire’ the brain.
Computer games and fast-paced TV shows were also a factor, she said.
‘We know how small babies need constant reassurance that they exist,’ she told the Mail yesterday.
‘My fear is that these technologies are infantilising the brain into the state of small children who are attracted by 
buzzing noises and bright lights, who have a small attention span and who live for the moment.’
Her comments echoed those she made during a House of Lords debate earlier this month. Then she argued that 
exposure to computer games, instant messaging, chat rooms and social networking sites could leave a generation with 
poor attention spans.
‘I often wonder whether real conversation in real time may eventually give way to these sanitised and easier screen 
dialogues, in much the same way as killing, skinning and butchering an animal to eat has been replaced by the 
convenience of packages of meat on the supermarket shelf,’ she said.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
TEXT ANALYSIS
12
Look back at the two articles from The Guardian and Mail Online again. In groups, answer the following 
questions, carefully considering how language has been used.
1 What are the main arguments raised in each article?
2 How are facts and opinions used in each article?
3 What view of teenagers is given in each article?
4 How is scientific research used to put across the main points of view in each article?
5 What linguistic devices have been used to present the point of view more powerfully in each article?
▼ PICKING OUT KEY INFORMATION AND RECOGNISING BIAS
ACTIVITY 3
HOW WRITERS USE LANGUAGE TO 
INFLUENCE THEIR READERS
Once you have established the main ideas being communicated in a piece of 
non-fiction, you should consider whether the article is showing an opinion or 
bias. Look out for the following:
 
◼
use of biased language
 
◼
use of emotive language
 
◼
stating of opinion as fact
 
◼
use of unsupported claims
 
◼
the given facts
 
◼
an argument.
 
◼
use of quotations or the reported views of others
Lady Greenfield told the Lords a teacher of 30 years had told her she had noticed a sharp decline in the ability of her 
pupils to understand others.
‘It is hard to see how living this way on a daily basis will not result in brains, or rather minds, different from those of 
previous generations,’ she said.
She pointed out that autistic people, who usually find it hard to communicate, were particularly comfortable using 
computers.
‘Of course, we do not know whether the current increase in autism is due more to increased awareness and diagnosis of 
autism, or whether it can – if there is a true increase – be in any way linked to an increased prevalence among people of 
spending time in screen relationships. Surely it is a point worth considering,’ she added.
Psychologists have also argued that digital technology is changing the way we think. They point out that students no 
longer need to plan essays before starting to write – thanks to word processors they can edit as they go along. Satellite 
navigation systems have negated the need to decipher maps.
A study by the Broadcaster Audience Research Board found teenagers now spend seven-and-a-half hours a day in front 
of a screen.
Educational psychologist Jane Healy believes children should be kept away from computer games until they are seven. 
Most games only trigger the ‘flight or fight’ region of the brain, rather than the vital areas responsible for reasoning.
Sue Palmer, author of Toxic Childhood, said: ‘We are seeing children’s brain development damaged because they don’t 
engage in the activity they have engaged in for millennia.
‘I’m not against technology and computers. But before they start social networking, they need to learn to make real 
relationships with people.’
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
bias a particular point of view
emotive language language that stirs 
emotion in the reader
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION, COLLABORATION, 
INTERPERSONAL SKILLS
Read the article ‘Social websites harm children’s brains’, from Mail Online. Analyse it using the same steps as in 
Activity 1. What are the similarities and differences in the way that the two articles present ideas?
▼ DIFFERING WRITING SKILLS
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
REASONING, INTERPRETATION, 
DECISION MAKING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
TEXT ANALYSIS
13
Write a letter to persuade an organisation to ban fur in its products. 
Include the following rhetorical devices in your letter: 
 
◼
direct address 
 
◼
rule of three
 
◼
emotive language 
 
◼
imperative verbs 
 
◼
repetition
 
◼
rhetorical questions.
Your letter must be at least three paragraphs long and should follow all 
the conventions of a normal letter. 
▼ WRITING PERSUASIVELY
ACTIVITY 5
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
direct address using 2nd person pronoun 
‘you’ or ‘your’
rule of three literary device where three 
things are linked or something is repeated 
three times in order to emphasise them 
and ensure they are memorable
emotive language language that produces 
an emotional reaction
imperative verbs verbs that give an 
instruction or command
repetition saying the same thing more than 
once to highlight its importance
rhetorical questions questions that are 
asked to make a point rather than to get an 
answer
▲ They need “a warm, dry, comfortable place 
for snoozing”
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, INNOVATION
Read the following article, ‘Myth of the Teenager’ by Lucy Maddox, and answer the question.
 
▶ How does Lucy Maddox present teenagers in this article? 
Your answer should: 
 
◼
reflect on audience and purpose (that is, how and why language has been used for effect)
 
◼
show a detailed understanding of the article and the points that the writer is making
 
◼
identify a wide variety of devices used by the writer and analyse the effect in as much detail as possible 
 
◼
use appropriate terminology throughout.
After answering the question, write a one-paragraph summary in which you say how your understanding of the 
topic has developed or changed as a result of reading this article. What impact has it had on you and why? 
▼ ANALYSING IDEAS
ACTIVITY 6
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING, INTERPRETATION
Rhetorical devices are often used in texts which seek to present a 
particular point of view or opinion. Match the following rhetorical 
devices with the correct example sentence.
Emotive language
Kittens need a warm, dry, comfortable place for 
snoozing.
Personal pronouns
These vulnerable, weak kittens need our help.
Repetition
Over 100,000,000 cats need re-homing every week. 
Rule of three
You can help us make a difference; all we need is 
£2 a month.
Hyperbole
Every year the number of cats on the streets 
increases, every year it is up to us to rescue them.
▼ RHETORICAL DEVICES
ACTIVITY 4
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
TEXT ANALYSIS
14
‘MYTH OF THE TEENAGER’, BY LUCY MADDOX
Teenagers often get a bad press. There are easy stories to be mined here: 
ASBOs, underage drinking, “hug a hoodie,” drug use–even, recently, the 
teenager who drugged her parents to access the internet.
These are not new stereotypes. As a shepherd in Shakespeare’s A Winter’s 
Tale puts it, “I would there were no age between 10 and three-and-20, or that 
youth would sleep out the rest; for there is nothing in the between but getting 
wenches with child, wronging the ancientry, stealing, fighting.” Change the 
syntax, and this description could easily fit in many newspapers today.
Are the stereotypes fair? Is the idea of wild adolescence rooted in evidence? 
There are two sorts of arguments. On the one hand, neuroscientific evidence 
seems increasingly to suggest that this is a true developmental phase of its 
own—teenagers behave differently because their brains are different. On the 
other, some argue that teenagers behave differently because they are learning 
to handle so many new situations, and if we hold stereotypical ideas about 
their behaviour, we risk underestimating them.
Take the latter argument first. Philip Graham, a professor of psychiatry who 
has written extensively on what he perceives to be a misconception, believes 
that although hormonal and physical changes are occurring, most teenagers 
are not risky or moody. Graham sees teenagers as a stigmatised group, often 
highly competent yet treated as if they were not. He argues that teenagers 
need to be acknowledged as potentially productive members of society and 
that the more independence and respect they are given, the more they will 
rise to the challenge.
“Once young people reach the age of 14, their competence in cognitive 
tasks and their sexual maturity make it more helpful to think of them as 
young adults,” says Graham. “Media coverage is almost uniformly negative. 
Adolescence is a word used to describe undesirable behaviour in older adults. 
Young people of 14, 15 or 16 are thought to be risk-takers… they are people 
who are experimenting. They are doing things for the first time and they make 
mistakes. Would you call a toddler who is learning to walk and who falls over 
all the time a risk-taker? These people are just beginning something.”
Graham places less importance on the conclusions of research into risk-
taking and on adolescent brain changes – “Not to say there are not a small 
minority who do take dangerous risks but I think the results have been over-
generalised to justify the stereotype.”
Instead, Graham argues that the way teenagers make decisions is related to 
encountering situations they haven’t dealt with before. “If they are moving 
into new types of social situation they do need more help with that.” He 
likens it to learning to drive, something you need expert help with at any age.
However, neuroscientific evidence suggests a basis for the teenage stereotype. 
Sarah-Jayne Blakemore, a professor at University College London, has 
specialised in researching the adolescent brain using a variety of techniques, 
including functional brain scanning. Although also concerned that teenagers 
can be vilified in the media, Blakemore rejects the idea that adolescence is 
entirely a social construct: “If you look throughout history at the descriptions 
of adolescence they are similar, and also in different cultures. Of course this is 
not to say that all adolescents are the same, but there is quite a lot of evidence 
that during this period of life there’s an increase in risk-taking, peer influence 
▶
GENERAL VOCABULARY
ABSOs a court order used in the UK to 
restrict anti-social behaviour
hug a hoodie a slogan used to make fun of 
British politicians who attempt to engage 
with disaffected young people
stigmatised unfairly discriminated against 
or disapproved of
vilified discussed or described in a very 
negative way
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
stereotypes fixed and generalised ideas 
about particular types of people or groups
syntax the way in which words and 
phrases are arranged into sentences
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
TEXT ANALYSIS
15
and self-consciousness.” Blakemore’s research suggests that during the teenage 
years the brain is still developing the capacity for certain sophisticated skills, 
including problem-solving, social skills and impulse control.
Blakemore and other researchers describe a gradual development of 
brain areas related to planning, inhibiting inappropriate behaviour 
and understanding other points of view. They also suggest a less linear 
development of the system in the brain that recognises and responds to 
rewards. “Teenagers tend to be more self-conscious,” said Blakemore. “They 
show more risk-taking when their peers are present.” Their social brain is 
changing and so is their ability to plan, inhibit impulses and make decisions.
“Research by Laurence Steinberg at Temple University in the US has shown 
that adolescents tend not to take into account future consequences of actions. 
For example, if you offer them a choice between having £10 now and 
£100 in six months, whilst adults tend to wait for the larger amount, most 
adolescents are more likely to go for the lower value now. Life in the future 
doesn’t hold so much importance.”
It might make sense, then, that a teenager trying to decide whether to tell a 
lie in order to go out, or to try an illegal drug, might be influenced more by 
the reward of the night out or the novel experience, or peer congratulation, 
than by longer-term negative consequences. “It’s not that teenagers don’t 
understand the risks,” says Blakemore. “It’s just that for some teenagers, in 
the moment, this understanding goes out of the window.”
Despite their different views, both academics conclude that teenagers 
could benefit from being treated according to their development. Graham 
suggests friendly advice-giving. It is important to “recognise their desire for 
autonomy,” he says. “They want to do more than they can. We should treat 
them differently because they are inexperienced… and first experiences are 
important. A bad experience can put you off something for a long time.”
He does not advocate tolerating too much difficult behaviour, though: 
“Adolescents are influenced by the stereotype as well. If they expect to 
get away with being ‘bolshy’ for example… I don’t think we should be 
particularly tolerant of bad behaviour in adolescence.”
Blakemore thinks that we should adjust the way we try to motivate 
teenagers: “Anti-smoking campaigns, for example, might be more effective 
if they used short-term social negatives like bad breath as a disincentive, 
rather than longer-term health consequences. And we perhaps expect 
too much. “We expect them to act like adults but their brains aren’t yet 
completely like an adult brain. Maybe we should be more understanding. 
Teaching adolescents about how their brains develop might be helpful.”
Whether you attribute adolescent differences in decision-making to brain 
development or lack of experience, educational aims could include the 
handling of social dilemmas. Parents might be able to help by being explicit 
about the pros and cons of a situation, considering other people’s views or 
negotiating in a transparent way. We should also bear in mind that teenagers 
are often uniquely affected by economic and political challenges such as high 
unemployment levels.
In my view, adolescence is a tricky time, where individuals often struggle to 
find their own identity in the face of a sometimes hostile outside world, whilst 
needing peer support. Both Blakemore and Graham are more phlegmatic. 
“Every time’s a tricky time,” says Graham. “You try being my age.”
GENERAL VOCABULARY
inhibiting preventing or restraining 
someone or something
autonomy the ability to make independent 
decisions about yourself
bolshy British slang meaning 
argumentative or uncooperative
Disincentive a factor that persuades 
someone not to do something
▲ Adolescents often struggle to find their own 
identity
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
16
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
identify the main parts of 
speech
 
◼
consolidate your 
understanding of the function 
of each.
The happy lady was laughing.
This is a verb. It is a word 
that describes actions.
This is an adjective. It is a describing 
word. It tells us more about the noun.
Words may be divided into groups called parts of speech. Words 
are classified as one of nine parts of speech:
 
◼ verb
 
◼ noun
 
◼ pronoun
 
◼ adjective
 
◼ adverb
 
◼ preposition
 
◼ conjunction
 
◼ interjection
 
◼ determiners.
WORD CLASSES
▶
Each part of speech signifies how the word is used, not what a word is. This 
means that the same word can be a noun in one sentence and a verb or 
adjective in the next. For example, the word ‘book’ in the following sentences.
 
◼
Books are made of ink, paper and glue.  
(In this case, ‘books’ is a noun and is the subject of the sentence.)
 
◼
Deborah waits patiently while Bridget books the tickets.  
(In this case, ‘books’ is a verb and the subject of the sentence is Bridget.)
If you were asked to describe the following photograph, you might say, ‘The 
happy lady was laughing’. 
This sentence is made up of different parts of speech.
▲ You can analyse the function of different words in a description
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
verb a word that describes actions
noun a word that represents a person, 
place, object or quality
pronoun a word that is used instead of a 
noun
adjective a word that describes a noun or 
pronoun
adverb a word that describes a verb or an 
adjective
preposition a word that is used before a 
noun or pronoun to show time, place or 
direction
conjunction a word that joins parts of a 
sentence
interjection a word used to express a 
strong feeling
determiner a word used before a noun in 
order to show which thing is being referred 
to
This is a noun. It is 
a naming word.
PARTS OF SPEECH
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
17
In the following sentences, circle the adjectives, tick the nouns and 
underline the verbs.
1 I tripped over the uneven floor.
2 The silly boy crashed his new bike.
3 When the old lady reached her house, she sat down.
4 We saw wild horses in the forest.
5 The large crowd cheered as the skilful player scored.
6 The giggling girls annoyed the teacher.
7 A prickly hedgehog snuffled in the dry leaves.
8 The lazy man was sleeping under the tall tree.
▼ IDENTIFYING PARTS OF SPEECH
ACTIVITY 1
KEY POINT
All words are divided into nine classes, 
known as parts of speech.
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
Write a suitable word in the gap in each of the following sentences. In 
the brackets after each sentence, write down what part of speech it is.
1 Sam put the ___________ suitcase on the floor. (________________)
2 Athens is the capital of ________________. (________________)
3 The mountaineers ______________ to the summit. 
(_________________)
4 The children sang loudly at the _______________. (_________________)
5 The cat’s ______________ was soft and silky. (_________________)
6 The helicopter ______________ over the motorway. 
(_________________)
▼ USING PARTS OF SPEECH
ACTIVITY 2
Nouns that name particular things are called Proper Nouns and begin with 
capital letters. The names of people and places, days of the week, brand 
names, company names and titles of films are all proper nouns, e.g. Yara, 
France, Thursday, Google, Ford, Avatar
A preposition tells us the position of one thing in relation to another.
Altamash hid behind the tree. 
You cross over a bridge. 
PROPER NOUNS
PREPOSITIONS
HINT
Many verbs are doing words and are 
used to describe actions; such as ‘the 
boy kicked the ball’. Some verbs are bing 
words; ‘The girl is muddy’.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
18
Connotations are the associations and ideas which a particular 
word or image suggests to a reader. It is important to consider 
the connotations implied by a text in order to explore its effects in 
detail. 
CONNOTATIONS
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
explore and develop your 
interpretations of language 
 
◼
considering the associations 
that words hold and how they 
can be used to create meaning 
in a text. 
Copy and complete the table, writing down the denotation and the 
connotation for each image. On a piece of paper, draw your own 
example of a sign or image. Ask a partner to look at your image and 
identify its denotation and connotation.
▼ IMAGE/SIGN
▼ DENOTATION 
▼ CONNOTATION 
Skull and crossed bones
Pirates, poison, danger
▼ CONNOTATIONS OF IMAGES
ACTIVITY 1
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
denotation what something is
connotation what something makes us 
think of
▶
KEY POINT
Words and images can have a range 
of connotations that influence meaning 
and interpretation.
SKILLS
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
19
Your local newspaper runs a weekly column called ‘Why I love…’, in 
which a guest writer is asked to write a short article to inform readers of 
a personal interest. Read the following extract, from a piece called ‘Why 
I love reading’, and consider the connotations of the highlighted words, 
and then answer the question. 
I love reading because I love getting to know new characters. They 
become friends: I inhabit their lives while I read and when I finish 
that book, I take a part of them with me. Reading gives me an escape 
from reality: it’s my magic carpet that I can fly on whenever I choose, 
soaring off on adventures all over the world, from past to present, 
over the vast terrains of human history. I can see all of the colours 
of life as I go. They say you never read the same book twice: reading 
a new book makes me feel slightly new myself because I know 
something different; I’ve experienced something more. Reading makes 
me a bigger, better, smarter version of myself. 
▶ What ideas and attitudes to reading are suggested in the extract? 
Copy and complete the following table, considering the connotations 
of the highlighted words and phrases used in the extract. Then choose 
another quotation from the extract and consider its connotation.
▼ PHRASE
▼ CONNOTATION
‘new characters… 
become friends’ 
‘it’s my magic carpet' 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Reading makes me a 
bigger, better, smarter 
version of myself.’
By describing characters as ‘friends’, the writer 
demonstrates the emotional connection they feel with 
books and the companionship they get from reading. 
The metaphor describes reading as a ‘magic carpet’. 
This has connotations of adventure and implies the 
fantastic experiences that the writer enjoys in reading 
books. The ‘magic carpet’ also has connotations of 
freedom and flight: books give this reader the wings to 
explore worlds which might otherwise be inaccessible 
to them. 
▼ CONNOTATIONS OF WORDS
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING
Using the extract ‘Why I love reading’ as a model, write two paragraphs of your own, entitled ‘Why I love…’ and 
‘Why I hate…’. Choose something that you will enjoy writing about: it can be anything you like, from motorbikes 
to a favourite website. Use bias, emotive language and connotations to create a positive or negative description 
of your chosen subjects. You may choose to use similes, metaphors and other figurative language to help you to 
do this.
▼ CREATING YOUR OWN CONNOTATIONS
ACTIVITY 3
KEY POINT
Connotations are how writers are 
able to convey their ideas to readers/ 
inferring information from a text is a 
critical skill in understanding what 
message and ideas the author wants to 
convey to readers.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
20
A sentence is group of words that make sense together on their own.
‘Friend, car, France holiday’ is not a sentence as it doesn’t make sense.
‘I am driving my friend to France for a holiday’ is a sentence. You can 
understand what it means as it makes sense on its own. 
Sentences are the basis of our communication and come in different forms.
 
◼
A declarative (or statement) conveys information. 
My car is red.
 
◼
An interrogative (or question) asks for information. 
Does it go fast?
 
◼
An imperative (or command) tells someone to do something. 
Get in.
 
◼
An exclamation shows that someone feels strongly about something. 
It’s great!
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
identify the main sentence 
types.
A sentence is a group of words that make sense on their own. 
It is a basic component of communication. Clumsy sentence 
structure leads to writing that is grammatically incorrect. Poor 
sentence structure will also prevent your ideas flowing in a 
coherent and logical way and make it much more difficult for the 
reader to understand what you are trying to convey. A writer’s 
use of sentence structure often helps to convey meaning in a text. 
It is important to be able to identify and comment on this in the 
reading sections of the exam. 
DIFFERENT SENTENCE TYPES
TYPES OF SENTENCES 
SIMPLE SENTENCES 
A simple sentence contains a single subject, a verb and an object. This is 
also known as a clause.
The boy ate the chocolate.
Single sentences may contain other elements or parts of a clause, but they 
only express one thing. 
▶
Match the sentences with the sentence types.
1 The door is open. 
statement
2 Go and have a wash. 
question
3 What a lovely surprise! 
command
4 Have you seen my shorts? 
exclamation
▼ SENTENCE TYPES
ACTIVITY 1
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
clause a group of words that make up part 
of a sentence
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
HINT
Remember the conjunctions that you can 
use to create a compound sentence by 
using the acronym FANBOYS: 
For, And, Nor, But, Or, Yet, So
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
21
 
◼
The verb identifies the action of a clause or, in other words, what happens.
Her boyfriend gave her a bunch of flowers.
 
◼
The object identifies who or what is directly affected by the action of the 
verb. This is always a noun or pronoun. Two kinds of objects follow verbs: 
direct and indirect objects.
The example, ‘Her boyfriend gave her a bunch of flowers’, contains a direct 
object (‘Her boyfriend’) and an indirect object: in this case the recipient of 
the direct object (‘her’). 
Not all verbs are followed by objects: 
  After work, David usually walks home.
Verbs that take objects are known as transitive verbs. Verbs not followed 
by objects are called intransitive verbs. Some verbs can be both.
A sentence may also contain the following:
 
◼
The complement gives extra information about the subject or object.
 
◼
The adverbial gives additional information about a situation: when, where 
and how it happened. 
PARTS OF A CLAUSE
HINT
To determine the subject of a sentence, 
first isolate the verb and then make a 
question by placing ‘who?’ or ‘what?’ 
before it. The answer is the subject of the 
sentence. 
COMPOUND SENTENCES
A sentence must contain the following parts.
 
◼
The subject identifies the topic of a clause or, in other words, what it 
is about. Every complete sentence contains two parts: a subject and a 
predicate. The subject is what or whom the sentence is about, and the 
predicate tells us something about the subject. In the following sentence, 
the predicate is enclosed in brackets ( ), while the subject is highlighted.
My hockey teacher and his dog (go running every morning).
A compound sentence consists of two simple sentences (clauses) joined by 
a conjunction. A conjunction is a joining word. It may be used to join two 
sentences together. 
It was raining. I put up my umbrella. (two sentences)
It was raining so I put up my umbrella. (one sentence with a conjunction)
▲ An adverbial word or phrase can tell the 
reader when this happened
Subordinate clauses are often present in a sentence. They are called 
subordinate as they are second to the main action in the sentence; they are 
additional information that the sentence doesn’t need to function. 
After his Dad gave him some pocket money, Andrew went to the cinema.
‘After his Dad gave him some pocket money’ is a subordinate clause. Anything 
between commas, dashes or brackets would be subordinate clauses too. 
SUBORDINATE CLAUSES
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
Find the subject, verb and object in the following sentences. Can you 
find any adverbials as well?
1 Last week, Peggy redecorated the pub. 
2 Are you hungry yet? 
3 Martin, be quiet. 
4 Tuesday was very rainy and cold.
▼ PARTS OF A SENTENCE
ACTIVITY 2
COMPLEX SENTENCES
A complex sentence contains a main sentence and one or more subordinate 
clauses that contribute to the meaning of the statement. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
22
EDINGLY openers consist of words ending in -ED (verbs), -ING (verbs) and -LY 
(adverbs). They can be an engaging way to begin sentences. 
▶ How could you change these sentences using this technique? 
1 I walked through the dark alley and suddenly a hand reached out and 
grabbed my shoulder.
2 I was breathing deeply as I crept through the deep, dark wood.
3 I was trapped and could not see a way out.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
use a full range of sentence 
structures 
 
◼
control and vary sentence 
structure for effect in your 
writing.
When sentence structure is repetitive and boring, writing is less 
interesting to read. Learning how to use sentence structure for 
effect will help you to engage your reader. 
SENTENCES FOR EFFECTS
Little variety in 
sentence structure
Skilful control in the construction 
of varied sentence forms 
EDINGLY OPENERS: VARYING 
SENTENCE STARTERS FOR IMPACT 
HINT 
Use a comma or exclamation mark after 
the opener. 
What is suspense? How do writers build suspense? Why do we like a 
good mystery? What do you expect from a suspense story? 
Read the following extract and see how many sentence types you can 
identify. Does it create a sense of suspense? 
The window shattered, sending glass cascading in all directions. 
Flames exploded into the room. I ducked, keeping my body as low 
as I could, desperately trying to avoid the smoke that was rapidly 
streaming across the ceiling. I scanned the room for other exits and 
was glad to see a small window on the far wall. The smoke was 
getting denser and started to expand, the cloud reaching down from 
the ceiling to the floor. My brain shouted, ‘Move!’ Frozen. Taking a 
deep breath of clean air, possibly my last, I pushed away from the wall 
to safety. As I struggled to open the window, I felt my heart pounding. 
My lungs screamed for air. The smoke descended and I worked blind, 
my eyes stinging. I pulled frantically at the catches, felt them give and 
tumbled out onto the ground below. I felt the heat escaping from the 
open window above and started to crawl slowly away. 
▼ EXPLORING SENTENCE TYPES
ACTIVITY 1
▶
If writing contains little variety in sentence structure, it will be less interesting 
for the reader than if it contains a variety of sentence types that are handled 
well.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
23
Re-write the following extract as three sentences. What is the effect?
Ryan stood as still as stone, listening intently, but the faint rustling 
continued from inside the bedroom, so putting his good eye to the 
keyhole, he peered into the dimly lit room.
Re-write the following extract as five sentences. What is the effect? 
He squinted through the gloom of the interior, which was quite 
deserted, with a single candle burning near the altar, thinking that it 
was sad to see an empty church on Christmas Eve, but, shrugging the 
thought away, he began a careful inspection of the places where the 
statue might have been concealed.
▼ ADAPTING SENTENCE TYPES FOR EFFECT
ACTIVITY 3
KEY POINT
Sentence structure can be used for 
particular effect. For example, short, 
simple sentences can be used to build 
suspense or a sense of actions, whilst 
longer, complex sentences may be 
helpful in creating a layered character 
description.
▲ “Grasping the handle, she turned it slowly”
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION,  
DECISION MAKING
SKILLS
INTERPRETATION, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING
Compare the two extracts below and consider how effectively each has 
created a feeling of suspense. The first is written using short simple 
sentences and the second uses long complex sentences. Compare 
the two passages and then copy out and add to the table that follows, 
writing down the effects of using each type of sentence. 
EXTRACT 1
Running. Faster. Faster. She grabbed the handle and turned it. Pushing 
the door open, she moved inside. No one was there. She turned and 
fled in the opposite direction. 
EXTRACT 2
Jane stood in the doorway collecting her thoughts, delaying her 
decision until the last possible moment. As she plucked up her 
courage, she studied the door in front of her. It was crafted from an 
ancient-looking wood, the handle a simple metal ring. Jane glanced 
down at her shaking hand as she stretched out to turn the handle. She 
took two deep breaths, brushing her fringe from her pale face with 
nervous fingers. She stood a while, thoughts racing through her mind. 
Then, at last, she was ready. Grasping the handle, she turned it slowly; 
pushing the heavy door in front of her, she stepped into the hallway.
▼ CREATING SUSPENSE
ACTIVITY 2
▼ SHORT, SIMPLE SENTENCES
▼ COMPLEX, LONGER SENTENCES
Develop tension
Give a detailed picture of the action
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
25
PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
25
WRITING SKILLS
WRITING SKILLS
25
Assessment Objective 4 
Communicate effectively and 
imaginatively, adapting form, 
tone and register of writing 
for specific purposes and 
audiences
Assessment Objective 5 
Write clearly, using a range 
of vocabulary and sentence 
structures, with appropriate 
paragraphing and accurate 
spelling, grammar and 
punctuation
This chapter focuses on some core writing skills that you can 
apply to all parts of the English Language A course. Working 
through these lessons and activities will help you to develop 
the writing skills that you will need for the exams and 
coursework assignments.
The chapter is split into the following sections:
◼ Vocabulary
◼ Sentences
◼ Structure
◼ Punctuation and spelling.
In the writing sections of your exams you will need to be able 
to meet the Assessment Objectives, AO4 and AO5.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
VOCABULARY
26
Your words need to attract the attention of a reader and keep 
them engaged so that they will continue to read what we have 
written. Choosing the correct vocabulary is central to achieving 
this. 
CHOOSING THE RIGHT VOCABULARY
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
appreciate a writer’s choice of 
words 
 
◼
develop your own choice of 
words.
Work with a partner and write two opening sentences using each of the 
senses: sight, sound, smell, taste and touch.
▼ ENGAGING THE SENSES
ACTIVITY 1
▶
▶
When you write or speak, your choice of words can be very important, 
especially when you write. When you speak, the person who is listening can 
ask you to explain yourself if anything you say is not clear. However, when you 
write, your reader will probably not be able to ask for an explanation so you 
have to get things right first time.
There are times when you need to be precise in your choice of words. 
Compare these two sentences: 
Some sort of animal could be seen approaching along the side of the road.
A cat could be seen walking cautiously along the gutter.
 
▶ Which of these two sentences is clearer and more precise? Which words and 
phrases bring about this effect?
Next, compare these two sentences:
Here at summer camp you will be under the supervision of a residential nurse 
and a medical practitioner who is available at any time.
Welcome to summer camp where we hope you will enjoy being cared for.
You could read either of these sentences at the start of a stay at a summer 
camp and they would make sense. However, one immediately informs you 
of the medical precautions that have been taken and this suggests that 
PRECISION 
Words that engage our senses are particularly effective for this purpose. Look 
at these opening sentences:
 
◼
It exploded in her face. (sight)
 
◼
Something was scratching under the door. (sound)
 
◼
From the kitchen came a reminder of the garlic that she loved. (smell)
 
◼
He pulled a face as if he had swallowed sour milk. (taste)
 
◼
The wind brushed his skin. (touch)
SKILLS
INNOVATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
VOCABULARY
27
This extract is from an account of the sinking of the Titanic. The 
Titanic had been described as unsinkable, and so its sinking caused 
widespread shock in 1912. Read the following extract carefully, noticing 
the choice of language used to convey the witness’s shock and horror. 
Then copy and complete the table, selecting key words and phrases 
that the writer uses to convey what they can see. 
In a couple of hours, though, she [the Titanic] began to go down more 
rapidly. Then the fearful sight began. The people in the ship were just 
beginning to realise how great their danger was. When the forward 
part of the ship dropped suddenly at a faster rate, so that the upward 
slope became marked, there was a sudden rush of passengers on all 
the decks towards the stern. It was like a wave. We could see the great 
black mass of people in the steerage sweeping to the rear part of the 
boat and breaking through into the upper decks. At the distance of 
about a mile we could distinguish everything through the night, which 
was perfectly clear. We could make out the increasing excitement on 
board the boat as the people, rushing to and fro, caused the deck 
lights to disappear and reappear as they passed in front of them. 
▼ KEY WORD OR PHRASE
▼ WHAT IT CONVEYS
Fearful 
 
This word conveys the pitiful state of the 
panicking passengers who were still on the 
ship
▼ PRECISION IN ACTION 
ACTIVITY 2
KEY POINT
The bigger your vocabulary, the more 
words you have to choose from and 
the easier it is to express yourself 
clearly. The best way to improve your 
vocabulary is by reading and taking an 
interest in the words that other people 
use. 
GENERAL VOCABULARY
stern rear of a boat
steerage the lower decks where the 
cheapest accommodation was provided
there might be a need for medical supervision. The second sentence simply 
provides a more appropriate, warmer welcome that expresses a hope that 
things go well.
Finally, compare these two sentences:
Put dirty cutlery into the basket on the left and leave dirty crockery next to 
the sink on the right, taking care that no uneaten food is dropped carelessly 
onto the floor.
Please leave your dirty cutlery and crockery in the places indicated; your 
keeping this area clean and tidy will help our staff who will appreciate your 
cooperation. Thank you.
The first sentence simply instructs you what to do and anticipates that you 
will be careless. The second example contains three very important words, 
‘please’ and ‘thank you’. This shows the writer addressing the reader with 
respect and consideration by showing why the reader’s taking care will be 
appreciated by other people. 
 
▶ Which of these two sentences will encourage better cooperation?
These examples show the impact that individual words can have and their 
significance in how a sentence is read.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
▲ RMS Titanic
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
VOCABULARY
28
A word means more than just its referend. For example, the word ‘grease’ 
denotes or refers to an oily material often used to lubricate machinery or carry 
medication. Sometimes, however, the word is used to indicate distaste or 
revulsion, allowing the word’s connotations, such as ‘nauseous’, ‘slimy’ and 
‘sticky’, come into play. 
Some words have positive or negative connotations, such as ‘success’ or 
‘regrets’.
They talked all morning about her success. 
In the first sentence, the use of the word ‘success’ means that you know that 
whatever she had done was approved of or appreciated as something positive. 
Now she was left only with her regrets. 
However, in the second sentence, the use of the word ‘regrets’ lets you know 
that the subject now wishes that she had not done something which is seen 
now in a negative light.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
consider the effect of words 
and phrases
 
◼
demonstrate an ability to use 
words and phrases to good 
effect.
The words you use come from the vocabulary that you know and 
can use confidently and comfortably. Some words – the, some, is, 
what, for example – do not have the effect of other words such as 
revolting, splendid, monster and eliminate. Here you are going to 
look at the way writers choose words.
VOCABULARY FOR EFFECT 
CONNOTATIONS 
1 Work in small groups and discuss the effect of these words and phrases:
traitor     magic     cool    on the brink
totally helpless    awesome    readily available
desperate    cruel    adorable
2 Write complete sentences using each of the words and phrases listed 
in question 1.
3 Read the following extract and choose some of the words and phrases 
in it that have a particular effect on you as a reader. Then copy and 
complete the table, adding your own ideas. Try to find at least another 
six examples.
Once upon a time it was said that three trolls lived in a forest. Local 
people lived in fear of them and avoided at night the twisting path that 
wound its way between the trees. From time to time late-night travellers 
would find themselves lost in the forest, alone and bewildered, and 
they would imagine the sound of a foot snapping a twig or catch in the 
corner of their eye something moving in the shadows.
These close encounters with the trolls were reported widely and fed 
the imaginations of the locals. None of them realised that nobody had 
ever been harmed in any way by these trolls, but that did not restrain 
ACTIVITY 1
▶
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
referend the thing or idea to which it refers
connotation ideas linked to a word; ideas 
that have become associated with a word
▶
GENERAL VOCABULARY
nauseous feeling sick
▼ CHOOSING VOCABULARY IN PRACTICE
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION,  
INNOVATION, COLLABORATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
VOCABULARY
29
A synonym is a word that means the same thing or nearly the same thing as 
another word. They can be used to echo or widen our understanding of a word 
or to reinforce an idea. 
The young tree, the sapling, was the place chosen by the blackbird to build 
its nest
Here the word ‘sapling’ provides a synonym for the tree. It helps to develop 
the referend (tree) by supplying more detail and further connotations.
those people who really enjoyed terrifying their fellow citizens with 
outrageous tales of a death that could so easily catch up with them in 
the woods around the town. 
The truth of the matter was that the three trolls were very shy. 
However, they craved the company of other beings and would 
approach them warily in the forest and then, before they could 
introduce themselves, their courage would fail and they would scuttle 
back into the undergrowth, safely out of sight.
▼ QUOTE
▼ WHAT EFFECT IT HAS
Once upon a time… 
 
 
 
Bewildered 
This expression is frequently used to 
start fairy tales and so its use here 
alerts the reader to the possibility that 
this story follows key features of the 
genre.
This word creates a strong sense of 
uncertainty.
4 Complete the following sentence stem with six different words or 
phrases, indicating the effect you are aiming for in each case.
When it rains we…
5 Write a brief paragraph to finish the troll story. Before you start, state 
the effect that you would like to achieve; perhaps you would like to 
amuse your reader or shock them. Make it clear what your intention 
is before you start. 
SYNONYMS 
KEY POINT
In this section you have seen how 
words used thoughtfully enable the 
writer to achieve more. Powerful 
results are possible when words are 
effectively chosen.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
VOCABULARY
30
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
appreciate how language can 
be used to bring about a wide 
variety of effects.
Visit a library and look for examples of written material that is 
informative, transactional, emotive, persuasive, discursive, entertaining, 
inspirational, descriptive, ironic and advisory. 
Record the source for each type and be aware that one source may 
include more than one of these types. If necessary, a librarian should be 
able to help you. 
ACTIVITY 1
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
transactional part of a dialogue or a 
conversation, often used in texting
ironic amusingly inconsistent
As you read you become aware of the different ways in which 
language is used, and often form preferences. When you read 
for a particular purpose, such as when looking for information 
on a holiday destination, you quickly learn to recognise the sort 
of material for which you are looking. This means that when you 
write something you should aim to make clear the purpose of the 
writing and the effect you want to achieve. It also helps to have 
examined and understood how other writers achieve different 
effects. 
LANGUAGE FOR DIFFERENT EFFECTS
▶
▼ TYPE OF EFFECT IN WRITING
1 Read the following extract and consider what effects the writer is 
trying to achieve. Look at some of the words used that indicate the 
writer’s intentions. See if you can find and explain other ways in 
which the language is used to achieve important effects.
I expect that you will have often heard warnings about the dangers to 
your health of smoking. One of my teachers once described handling 
the lungs of a victim of lung cancer; they resembled, he said, an old 
leather rugby ball1 and they sat in his hands, hard and rough like a 
large lump of coal2.
Giving advice to young people is often difficult for parents and 
teachers3; it’s part of growing up, to put aside advice and warnings 
from the older generation4 and to trust your own judgement. One of the 
difficulties for young people, however, is “peer pressure,” the need to fit 
in with their contemporaries, to meet their approval at least and, better 
still sometimes, to impress them. Daring to smoke, especially when it 
is forbidden, is part of this and it is probably as important for some 
young people as any pleasure to be gained from supposedly enjoying5 a 
cigarette while watching nervously in case a teacher appears6. 
ACTIVITY 2
▼ IDENTIFYING TYPES OF WRITING IN AN EXTRACT
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ANALYSIS, 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION, CREATIVITY
1 Warning: this is what can happen to 
smokers.
2 Description: shows the effects of 
smoking, to strengthen the warning.
3 Information: plainly stated and 
aimed at readers who have yet to be 
parents or teachers.
4 Explanation: rejecting adult advice is 
sometimes just a part of growing up.
5 Ironic: suggests that the person 
is not really enjoying the cigarette 
when the purpose of smoking is 
supposedly to enjoy it.
6 Description: shows the fear of a 
young person trying to show how 
grown-up he or she is. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
VOCABULARY
31
Look at the following sentence.
Now stop. 
Which of the two words in this sentence is emphasised? What is the effect of 
this?
If the order of the words is altered, something changes.
Stop now.
Instead of emphasising the action that is to be carried out, to stop, the 
emphasis is now on the timing of that action – it must be amended now, 
immediately.
The ordering of words in a sentence is important, particularly at the end of a 
sentence or before a pause. There is a brief moment before you hear the next 
word while the sound of the last word continues in your mind. Such a word is 
emphasised and brought to your attention. 
Look at the following sentences. One is the first sentence of the extract in 
Activity 2, and the other is a re-ordered version. Consider the difference made 
by re-ordering the words. Which ending do you think is the more effective? 
Can you say why?
I expect that you will have often heard warnings about the dangers to your 
health of smoking. 
I expect that you will have often heard warnings about the dangers of 
smoking to your health.
It may help you to analyse the phrases further by breaking them down into the 
following smaller phrases:
 
◼
about the dangers to your health / of smoking
 
◼
about the dangers of smoking / to your health.
There are three key words: ‘dangers’, ‘health’ and ‘smoking’. Which of these 
should be most closely connected? Perhaps it would help to put the three 
words together like this: Smoking endangers health. Can you see now why 
smoking was left at the end of the original sentence?
Look at the following literary devices. Can you think of an example of
each? What effect do they have?
Rhetorical question
Contrast
Repetition
Direct address
Pattern of three
Hyperbole
Alliteration
Simile
Personification
ACTIVITY 3
▼ OTHER LITERARY DEVICES
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
Rhetorical question a question that you 
ask as a way of making a statement, 
without expecting an answer
Contrast the difference between two 
or more things, used to highlight these 
features
Repetition repeating details for emphasis
Direct address the use of a proper noun 
to catch attention
Pattern of three grouping things together 
in threes to aid memory and add impact
Hyperbole exaggerating for effect
Alliteration the use of several words 
together that begin with the same sound 
or Similie
Similie an expression that describes 
something by comparing it with 
something else
Personification the representation of a 
thing or a quality as a person
KEY POINT
Your choice of words and phrases, 
and the way that you arrange and 
adapt them, are crucial if you want to 
communicate effectively.
SKILLS
INNOVATION, TEAMWORK
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
VOCABULARY
32
You must take care when choosing words, when arranging them and 
when you incorporate them into the speech and writing.
WHY OUR CHOICES MATTER
1 William Carlos Williams was an American poet and doctor. Because 
his medical work took him into homes where families were facing 
emergencies, he was able to learn a lot about them. This is one of his 
most famous poems, This is just to say. 
I have eaten
the plums
that were in
the ice box
and which
you were probably
saving
for breakfast.
Forgive me
they were delicious
so sweet
and so cold.
It is not difficult to imagine This is just to say as a hasty note of 
apology scrawled on a sticky note and stuck on a fridge door. 
Now look at the words of the poem arranged as ordinary sentences.
I have eaten the plums that were in the ice box and which you 
were probably saving for breakfast. Forgive me; they were 
delicious, so sweet and so cold. 
ACTIVITY 1
▶
▶
▼ HOW ARRANGEMENT OF WORDS AFFECTS MEANING
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand the importance of 
your choices when writing
 
◼
see how different choices can 
change meaning.
GENERAL VOCABULARY
clarity the quality of being expressed 
clearly
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
 
◼
Your choice of words matters because it enables you to write with 
precision or exactness, clarity and an appropriate tone.
 
◼
Your ordering of words matters because it allows you to phrase points in 
a way that is effective and clear.
 
◼
Your use of language and literary techniques matters because it enables 
you to achieve particular effects with writing.
▲ Even relatively simple poems such as this 
can create strong images
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
VOCABULARY
33
Work on your own and pick out key words in the poem which simply 
present clear facts. What words are left? What are the effects of 
these other words?
2 Work in a small group and consider these questions:
 
▶ Which words describe the plums? What effect does this description 
have? Does it simply help us to imagine what the plums were like?
 
▶ What happens to the tone or mood of the poem after the first 
sentence? 
 
▶ Which word is crucial here? What is the effect of the rest of the 
last sentence: ‘they were delicious | so sweet | and so cold’? What 
would be the effect of describing the plums in the first sentence? 
3 Write a cheeky note of mock apology along the lines of This is just to 
say. For example, you could write an apology to a particular teacher 
for failing to do your homework. 
4 Remember the different effects of, or purposes for writing: informative, 
transactional, emotive, persuasive, discursive, entertaining, inspirational, 
descriptive, ironic and advisory. How many of these can you find in 
Williams’s poem? Explain how these effects are brought about. 
To practise checking your own work, it helps to read other people’s 
material critically. Read the following extract and the critical analysis 
of the text to see an example of critical reading. Can you suggest any 
other changes?
For some time, it suited the British authorities to sentence troublesome 
people1 to transportation. Unfortunate poor people, who had found 
themselves starving and who had stolen food simply to stay alive, 
turned up2 in the colonies in the country that would become Australia. 
Along with others who had chosen to settle in this new country3, they 
made a go of things4 and now take on5 the English at games such as 
rugby and cricket and sometimes win.
1 ‘Convicts’ would be a more precise way of referring to them and 
technically correct, whether or not they deserved conviction.
2 ‘…turned up’ is vague. They were sent.
3 The reference to ‘others who had chosen to settle in this new country’ 
is verbose (excessively wordy or long-winded). They were settlers.
4 ‘made a go of things’ is slang and may not be clear to all speakers of 
English. They succeeded.
5 ‘now take on’ is inaccurate. It is their descendants who now take on 
the English.
▼ CHECKING WRITTEN MATERIAL 
ACTIVITY 2
KEY POINT
To write effectively, you must make 
sure your intention is clear to the 
reader.
▲ Transportation was often used as an  
alternative punishment to execution
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
SENTENCES
34
First look at sentences in a mechanical way. Here is a simple sentence. It has 
one verb, a main verb, took. 
They took their sunglasses.
To this you can add something more: 
They took their sunglasses and (they) enjoyed themselves.
The original sentence has become a compound sentence. Two simple 
sentences have become joined by a conjunction: and. They have become two 
coordinate clauses in a compound sentence. Each coordinate clause has a 
main verb, in this case, took and enjoyed.
You can develop the sentence further:
They took their sunglasses and enjoyed themselves although it was raining. 
To the compound sentence, with its two main verbs, a subordinate clause has 
been added: although it was raining. This clause also contains a verb, was 
raining; however, alone the clause, Although it was raining, makes incomplete 
sense. Without a main clause you do not know what happened while it was 
raining.
This clause has to be joined to the main sentence with a subordinating 
conjunction, although. The sentence is now a complex sentence with two main 
verbs and a subordinate verb. 
They took their sunglasses and enjoyed themselves although it was raining. 
You could link two of our components in other ways to form complex 
sentences:
They took their sunglasses although it was raining.
Although it was raining they took their sunglasses.
Each sentence here has a main clause and a subordinate clause.
Finally, look at another sentence:
He looked at the menu which was badly written.
A simple sentence, He looked at the menu, has become a main clause to 
which a relative clause, which was badly written has been added. This relative 
clause has been linked with a relative conjunction, which, to form another 
complex sentence.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand that ways in which 
sentences can be assembled
 
◼
see the way that the meaning 
of a sentence is made 
effective.
As you start to examine sentences it is important to remember 
what makes a sentence. A sentence is the most basic part of the 
written language and properly constructed sentences help you to
communicate effectively, whatever your purpose.
A sentence is built around finite verbs, or action words, which 
indicate whether the action takes place in the past, present or 
future and which have some indication of the agent, the person or 
thing that carries out the action.
SENTENCE TYPES
BUILDING SENTENCES
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
clauses groups of words built around a 
finite verb
▶
▲ What is the main verb?
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
SENTENCES
35
The purpose of examining sentences like this is to show you how you can build 
up ideas and communicate them effectively. By using subordinate, coordinate 
and relative clauses you can add information, without interrupting the flow of 
words, and still indicate the most important aspects of what you are saying.
Identify the finite verbs in these sentences and decide what kind of 
sentence it is.
1 We should try to smile and try to laugh.
2 The program, which she had spent weeks developing, crashed.  
3 Whenever they can all cows eat grass because grass is good for 
them.
ACTIVITY 1
Try to write a short narrative, describing a short sequence of events, 
using simple, compound and complex sentences. You could start with 
these two sentences:
‘His parents stood immediately in front of him. From beyond the 
closed door there came the sound of someone shouting and he 
decided to tell the truth.’
ACTIVITY 2
You will sometimes find groups of words punctuated as if they were ordinary 
sentences when they are not. 
Good. A reaction to something
Over here! A demonstration, some information
The boyfriend I ditched last week. An answer to a question 
In speech, such minor sentences are much more common and the listener can 
usually ask for clarification if required. When you write it is better only to use 
minor sentences in direct or quoted speech to show what is actually said.
MINOR SENTENCES 
KEY POINT
Words and phrases can be built up into 
different types of sentences. By varying 
the sentences you use, you help the 
reader to stay engaged and strengthen 
the effect of what you write.
WHY EXAMINE SENTENCES LIKE 
THIS?
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, INNOVATION
▼ IDENTIFYING FINITE VERBS 
▼ VARYING SENTENCE TYPES
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
SENTENCES
36
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
find your opening words.
Choosing the very first thing that you want to write or say can 
sometimes make it difficult to start. However, once you have 
taken that first step, you can continue more easily.
OPENING SENTENCES   
Here are some opening sentences. Where would you expect to find 
them? In a novel, a newspaper, a text book, a television broadcast?
1 It was a man in front of them, a man with a gun.
2 Before being despatched to you, the contents of this package were 
carefully checked.
3 Hot pools can be found in Rotorua, on New Zealand’s North Island, 
evidence of volcanic activity. 
4 The views here are fantastic; we can see from the car park a long 
gentle slope down to a beach where Pacific rollers crash and spread 
themselves across the sand.
5 Once upon a time there was a wild goat who lived in the forest.
6 And European ministers gathered today in Brussels to update their 
latest agreement.
7 In order to update their latest agreement, European ministers 
gathered in Brussels.
Work in groups and match each of these opening sentences to the 
explanations that follow.
i 
A newspaper article or an introduction to an item broadcast on 
radio or television. It’s about an event that has already taken 
place, but is being reported very soon afterwards. Notice that the 
main point is conveyed early in the sentence to encourage us to 
continue to pay attention.
ii An information slip, accompanying something that has been sent. 
The sentence tells you what was done before the item was sent and 
continues with an explanation that is designed to reassure you. 
iii Travel writing. We are stopped by the drama of the opening which 
is followed by a description of a geographical feature.
iv This account of the meeting in Brussels could appear in a book, a 
history book perhaps. The sentence begins with an explanation of 
why the event took place with the main point made briefly at the 
end of the sentence, as if it is of less importance. The event, the 
gathering, seems inevitable because there was a need to update 
the agreement.
ACTIVITY 1
▶
▶
▼ OPENING SENTENCE STYLE
Opening sentences are very important as they set the tone for the reader. They 
are mainly used to introduce but can also be used to explain, attract attention 
or pose questions.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, REASONING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
SENTENCES
37
v A narrative, the beginning of a novel or of a chapter in a novel. The 
reader is confronted with a simple but dramatic scene with only 
the bare essentials so that we are not distracted from the man 
with a gun. 
vi A geography book probably. The subject of the sentence, 
hot springs, which are a geographical feature, are introduced 
immediately and are referred to as ‘evidence’, a matter of interest 
to geographers. This information is delivered in a straightforward 
manner.
vii A children’s fairy story. The opening phrase is frequently used to 
introduce children’s stories.
Work in groups and copy and complete the table below. Look again at 
the sentences in Activity 1 and consider the most essential words in 
each opening sentence and what effects they create.
▼ ESSENTIAL WORDS
▼ THE EFFECTS THEY CREATE
1 in front, man, gun
There is drama because the writer is 
confronted by an armed man.
After completing the table, work on your own or with a partner. Write 
another introductory sentence to match each of the explanations in 
Activity 1. Swap your opening sentences with a partner or with another 
pair. Write a sentence of your own to follow the introductory sentence 
that has been passed to you.
ACTIVITY 2
KEY POINT
To start a piece of writing you can:
 
◼
use particular words or phrases 
 
◼
present something that is obviously 
new  
 
◼
refer to something that has already 
been mentioned before saying 
something new about it.
▲ The Charlemagne building – part of the EU in Brussels
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INNOVATION,  
COMMUNICATION
▼ KEY WORDS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
SENTENCES
38
Here’s a sentence from a book for young children.
The cat sat on the mat. 
To see how this sentence achieves its effect, consider the point of the 
sentence. What is it about? It’s about the cat sitting on the mat. That is all you 
are told. This a periodic sentence, a few simple words followed by a full stop 
(.) or, as it is called in American English, a period.
Let’s extend this sentence.
The cat sat on the mat and smiled.
This time the question is more subtle: what main point or points is the writer 
making? You are told two main points.
A compound sentence is a sentence with more than one subject.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand the ways that 
sentences achieve their 
effects. 
 
◼
understand the way in which 
a sentence is constructed 
around its main points.
You have already seen the mechanical ways in which sentences 
can be built up. Now look at the ways in which sentences achieve 
their effects. 
SENTENCES FOR EFFECTS  
▶
ANALYSING SENTENCES
Write a few periodic sentences on individual slips of paper. Then work 
as a group and see how many balanced sentences you can form by 
joining the slips in pairs. You will probably need a few additional words.  
Now look at a final development of the sentence.
With a huge grin on her face the cat sat on the mat while from next 
door there came the sound of a dog digging its way under the fence.
What is the main point? The cat sat on the mat. All the other information 
is of lesser importance and the main point is inserted among this 
additional information. This is a ‘loose sentence’.
Each person in the group now writes one short periodic sentence. Pass 
your sentence to another member of the group who should add further 
information in order to make a balanced sentence. This should then be 
passed onto the next member of the group to be turned into a loose 
sentence. 
ACTIVITY 1
▼ PERIODIC SENTENCES
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, INNOVATION, 
TEAMWORK
▲ What is the main point of this sentence?
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
Periodic sentence a sentence that is not
complete until the final word or clause
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
SENTENCES
39
Look at two aspects of these examples: their length and their ordering.
It was late. He had left home early, caught the early bus, but the accident on 
the main road meant he was alone now, after dark, in an area that he did not 
know.
A short opening sentence establishes the time in a dramatic fashion and the 
following sentence builds up to the next dramatic revelation, that the character 
is alone. It is then that more drama is revealed: the darkness and his lack of 
familiarity with the area.
These instructions should be followed carefully. Operatives who fail to do 
this will be dealt with severely. 
Here a simple sentence conveys information coupled with a warning at the end 
where it is more noticeable, more emphatic. The warning tone is maintained in 
the second sentence with its final warning that severe treatment is in prospect 
for operatives who fail to head the instructions.
What would you do? You come home to find your house broken open, your 
goods stolen, and all the plumbing smashed. Then the sergeant down at the 
police station asks you to stay calm. Keep calm?
Confronted with a disaster someone asks why they should be expected to stay 
calm. A short question holds us ready to respond. ‘You’ introduces the second 
sentence, an attempt to lead the reader into imagining the writer’s feelings and 
aspects of the disaster are listed to build up the force of the description. In 
the next sentence, the tension is eased as we are told of the police sergeant’s 
reaction, ready to hear the anger of the final, minor sentence, a simple 
question that is all the more direct and challenging in its brevity. 
Work on your own and write three sentences as follows: 
1 A periodic sentence including one of the following:
 
◼
an important piece of information
 
◼
a description of something that you find attractive
 
◼
something in which you believe very strongly. 
2 A balanced sentence developing the idea from your first sentence in 
two main points. 
3 A loose sentence developing your idea further.
Then, in groups or as a class, listen to each other’s sets of sentences 
read aloud and see how quickly you can identify the points they are 
trying to make.
ACTIVITY 2
MOVING ON 
KEY POINT 
In a periodic sentence the main point 
is found at the end, in a balanced 
sentence there is more than one main 
point and in a loose sentence the main 
point is not at the end. You can use 
this variety of sentence types to help 
convey effectively the things you wish 
to say in writing.
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, INNOVATION, 
TEAMWORK
▼ CONSTRUCTING VARIED SENTENCES
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
SENTENCES
40
There are three basic types of sentence: sentences that are informative, 
descriptive or discursive.
EFFECTS THAT WE CAN ACHIEVE 
Here you will look again at the effects that can be achieved in an opening 
sentence.
Look at the development of a simple sentence that provides information.
Our pets’ favourite sleeping place was the dog’s bed.
Now add some description.
Our pets’ favourite sleeping place was the dog’s bed, nestled in a woollen 
blanket next to the radiator.
And now some discussion.
Our pets’ favourite sleeping place was the dog’s bed, nestled in a woollen 
blanket next to the radiator, which was not fair on the two cats, the guinea 
pigs and the mice which used to hide there when they managed to escape 
from their cage.
 
▶ Identify the key words that convey information, description and discussion.
 
▶ Divide this last sentence into three sentences, one informative, one 
descriptive and one discursive.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
consider the purpose of 
sentences and the way you 
construct them to achieve  
your purposes.
It is important to consider the purpose of sentences and the way 
in which they are constructed. By always being aware of this, it is 
possible to convey clear and strong ideas.
SENTENCE PURPOSE
information 
amusement 
entertainment
discussion 
opinions
advice 
suggestions
guidance 
inspiration 
persuasion 
praise
warnings 
understanding  
bargaining  
instruction 
pleading 
hope
Sentences can convey: 
terror 
explanation 
BASIC SENTENCE TYPES
▶
KEY POINT
Remember to always consider your 
audience, whether you are speaking 
directly to them, or leaving something 
in writing for them to read later.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
SENTENCES
41
Here are two passages for you to consider. The first one is measured, with 
longer sentences. 
The news had arrived and it was not good. For many people in the crowd 
it was not bad news that they were expecting, but something better, the 
prospect of better rations at least. Better still would be release from this 
strange land and transport back to the border, if not all the way home. 
However, once they had listened to the commandant’s words, there was 
nothing for it but to make their way back to the barracks and try to get some 
sleep.
The first, balanced sentence provides two items of information; the second 
item provides a response to the first, a natural flow of ideas. The second 
complex sentence contrasts this bad news with what they had perhaps been 
hoping for, ‘something better’. This sentence is extended here with the phrase, 
‘the prospect of better rations at least’, an important descriptive detail. The 
idea of hope is also extended in a complex sentence where a group of three 
items remind of this: release, transport to the border and transport home. The 
first, subordinate clause in the final sentence kills off any prospect of hope and 
leads to a main clause in which the inevitability of this is brought home to us 
and the prisoners’ attempts to sleep bring closure to this episode. 
The second passage is rather more dramatic.
The hand of the clock moves to the vertical, like a sentinel arriving at his 
post. Now the moment has come. The referee looks around the pitch, catches 
the eye of each linesman and then raises his whistle to his lips. Mahama’s 
boot makes contact. There is the beginning of a roar. The ball reaches a 
winger. He turns and sends the ball back towards the keeper who picks it up, 
as if concerned for its safety. The ball bounces once in front of him and he 
kicks it forwards. Razak it is now. He moves forward. Modi joins him. One 
kick and the ball is bouncing in the net. 
A longer opening sentence holds us at the moment before the game begins. 
A short sentence hurries us towards the start, increasing the sense of drama, 
but then we are held still as the next sentence, a compound one, lists the 
referee’s three actions as he prepares to unleash the players. Three short, 
simple sentences propel the action forward, then a longer, complex sentence 
allows the goalkeeper to slow things down. The reader watches as the ball is 
taken under his control and returned, a balanced sentence holding back the 
excitement until a series of short sentences, pared of any surplus information, 
conveys the essentials and the scoring of the goal provides a natural end to 
the passage.
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, INNOVATION, 
COMMUNICATION, TEAMWORK
▲ Different types of sentences can determine 
how something is read
COMMENTARIES
To complete this section on sentences, carry out the following exercises 
to practice controlling your writing.
Work on your own and develop one of the following ideas into a 
paragraph of at least four sentences of varying length and complexity. 
Read this paragraph aloud, to your partner and ask them to comment.
a. The approach of a stranger.
b. A surprise around a corner.
c. A glance from a window.
d. A clever idea.
▼ CONTROLLING YOUR WRITING
ACTIVITY 1
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.
