WRITING SKILLS
STRUCTURE
42
Read the following sentence.
Zlatan, look out!  
There is an urgent call to one person here, the first name we hear: Zlatan. The 
most important word here is placed at the start of the sentence. However, now 
look at the following sentence:
After school I need to speak to you, Zlatan. 
Here a teacher is making an announcement and wants all the class to listen 
until the name of the student concerned is revealed at the end of the sentence. 
If you ask what a sentence is about, you can identify its subject. The subject of 
each of these sentences has been highlighted.
1 The ice cream was hidden in the freezer. 
2 Hidden in the freezer was the ice cream.
3 The ice cream, which her brother had hidden in the freezer, was 
discovered.
4 Hidden in the freezer, which had been turned off, was the ice cream.
Those parts of the sentence that are not the subject are called the predicate. 
The predicate can be discovered by asking the question, ‘What are we told 
about the subject of the sentence?’
Apply this question to the four sentences above.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
appreciate how you can 
structure or organise writing 
effectively, whether you 
are providing information, 
describing something, 
discussing something or 
providing entertainment.
When a piece of writing is judged, or marked by examiners, the 
purpose of the writing is considered, alongside the accuracy and 
clarity of the writing and with an overall sense of the writing’s 
effectiveness. 
Here you are going to consider the way that sentences and 
paragraphs are organised so that the structure of the writing is 
enhanced and made more effective.
PRINCIPLES OF STRUCTURE 
▶
UNDERSTANDING THE PRINCIPLES 
OF STRUCTURE
Work in pairs and identify the key words and ideas in each of these 
sentences. Ask what seems to be the key ideas that links one sentence 
to another. Then look at the beginnings, middles and endings of these 
sentences.
The ice cream was hidden in the freezer. Then the bananas were 
discovered in the bathroom and the marshmallows tucked away in 
Sophie’s bedroom. Now there would have to be an enquiry. 
Now identify the important step in each sentence of this mini-narrative.
ACTIVITY 1
▲ The structure of a sentence can alter the 
meaning and impact
▼ PURPOSE AND PROGRESSION IN SENTENCES
SKILLS
INNOVATION, TEAMWORK
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
STRUCTURE
43
The principle of steps in writing applies to any piece of writing that you do. 
Whether it is a brief email, a set of instructions for a piece of machinery, a text 
book or a novel, it will require an introduction, a middle section and an ending.
STAGES IN A PIECE OF WRITING
Work with a partner and identify the key words that show the transition 
from introduction, to mid-section, to the ending in the paragraph that 
follows.
The Turkish teacher met them at the airport and introduced her 
husband, a company lawyer. Soon they were hurrying along the 
freeway and then there was a turning off, followed by miles bumping 
along worn back roads. For a while he wondered just what he had let 
himself in for and then the car slowed. Away from the road there was 
a large timber house, set in a large garden. Then he sighed with relief 
for this was to be his home for the next six weeks.
Now use those same words in a paragraph of your own construction, 
to show shifts from the introduction, to the middle section, to the 
conclusion.
KEY POINT 
You have looked at how sentences can 
have an introduction, a middle section 
and an ending. The same is true of 
a more substantial piece of writing, 
including with books. 
ACTIVITY 2
▼ STAGE TRANSITION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS
Work with a partner and identify any story that you know and that you 
think your classmates will know. It could be a television drama, a film 
you have watched, a story that you have read or a story that was read 
to you. Describe the three stages of the story, the introduction, the 
middle section and the ending, in three sentences.
Before you start, here is an example of three sentences that outline a 
well-known story (The Cruel Sea by Nicholas Montsarrat) in the same 
way. 
We meet Ericson, the captain of both the boats involved in the story, 
in a naval dockyard where the first of his two commands is still in the 
hands of the builders. Ericson’s career, as captain of a warship that is 
sunk, and of another warship that survives the war, leads us through 
five years of naval warfare in what came to be known as The Battle of 
the Atlantic. At the end of this battle, Ericson finds himself in charge 
of captured submarines which are now incapable of threatening allied 
shipping any more. 
ACTIVITY 3
▼ BREAKING DOWN STORIES
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
STRUCTURE
44
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
use paragraphs effectively.
There are no mechanical rules about the size or length of 
sentences or paragraphs, nor about the number of lines or words 
needed. The important idea to grasp here is practical; how can 
you best organise sentences and paragraphs so that they are as 
clear as possible? 
You have already looked at ideas that link sentences. Now, 
when you start a new paragraph we have to do two things: 
firstly, maintain contact with what you have already written and, 
secondly, develop ideas, sometimes with new material, new 
ideas and new directions.
PARAGRAPHING FOR EFFECT 
▶
Work with a partner or in groups and read the passage below. Follow 
these items from the first paragraph into the second paragraph: the tea, 
the woman and the newspaper. How is each developed? 
The woman offered him another cup of tea. She had been very friendly 
since he had stepped into the house. The room seemed all right and 
now there was another cup of tea. There was something slightly odd 
about the taste, not enough to worry him and, anyway, he wanted 
to find out what the rent would be. While she waited for his answer 
she glanced down at the newspaper and folded it away, hastily, out of 
sight, behind one of the cushions.
There was a knock at the front door. The woman got up and went 
into the hall to see who it was and he could hear a conversation get 
under way. From behind the cushion he retrieved the newspaper and 
read the headline: Missing students - poisoner suspected. He took 
another sip of his tea. This time he screwed up his face and put down 
the cup. From one side he picked up his coat and stood up.
 
▶ What is new in the second paragraph? 
 
▶ What changes about the young man in the second paragraph?
There is a balance in these two paragraphs. You learn why the young 
man has come to the house and that information needs no further 
development. The hints about the tea in the first paragraph prepare you 
for the dramatic newspaper headline revealed in the second paragraph.
ACTIVITY 1
▼ DEVELOPING NARRATIVES
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
STRUCTURE
45
Work with a partner or on your own and identify the key words or ideas 
in each of the following two paragraphs. Copy and complete the table, 
commenting on the links between these words and ideas.
At the foot of the hill there is a large spread of woodland, pine trees 
– dark green, that swarm upwards, almost to the top of the hill. 
Local people love this place, to which they bring their dogs and their 
children; on most days, providing the weather is reasonable, you will 
see them dotted about on the parkland, clearly in no hurry, clearly 
enjoying this special space.
Now the county council has announced plans to extend the city ring-road 
to accommodate industrial traffic to the new factory sites as well as the 
growing rush-hour traffic associated with the expansion of the university. 
Councillors are divided about the threats to local people’s leisure and the 
need to move traffic quickly around the city. Protests are planned for next 
week and locals hope that the council will be sufficiently embarrassed 
and will re-think the transport committee’s recommendations.
▼ KEY WORDS AND IDEAS
▼ LINKS
Woodland/ring-road
Different types of location introducing 
each paragraph and contrasting what 
exists and what is proposed.
▼ KEY CONTENT IN PARAGRAPHS 
ACTIVITY 2
KEY POINT 
As you move from one paragraph to 
another you should indicate clearly that 
you are either developing an idea or 
introducing a new one.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS,
▲ A new paragraph can be used to shift tone or ideas
Work with a partner and develop the ideas that follow into sentences 
and paragraphs for a report in a newspaper. Remember to arrange the 
ideas in an order that suits the effect you want your report to have. 
Do you want to alert your readers, warn them or reassure them? Or 
something else completely?
A burst water main, a busy road junction, freezing weather 
conditions, accidents and a busy hospital…
ACTIVITY 3
▼ DEVELOPMENT IDEAS
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
STRUCTURE
46
Read this article about Nevil Shute, a British author in 20th century. His best-
known novel was A Town Like Alice.
Not many people1 who enjoyed Shute’s novels realised that he had started out 
as an engineer in the early days of aero-engineering after the First World War, 
not with aeroplanes, but with airships2. It was while he was working as an 
engineer that he began to write3. 
Although well-qualified4, with an engineering degree from Oxford University, 
Shute, whose full name was Nevil Shute Norway was a practical man5, 
interested in the ways that people from different backgrounds could get along 
well. In A Town like Alice, a brief encounter during the Second World War 
between a brash Australian prisoner of war and an English girl who had 
also been taken prisoner by the Japanese, developed into a romance as the 
Australian travels to England after the war to find the woman he had known 
as Mrs Bong6.
It is in his non-fiction7, his auto-biography, Slide Rule, that we learn how to 
build an air-ship and he describes the ladder-way inside the craft8 that enables 
engineers to climb out onto the top of the balloon while it is flying to sit and 
chat9. While the engineers hold on to a safety rope, passengers in the cabin 
slung below the balloon travel in comparative safety10. Shute also wrote 
authoritatively about the economics of air-ship construction and the politics 
that drove a government-controlled industry to compete with a private one11.
In this book we also learn of12 his terrible sadness in his early teens when his 
older brother was killed in the trenches of the First World War13, as a result of 
the enemy’s tunnelling under the British trenches and packing the space with 
high explosive. Shute watched as his brother, Fred, took two weeks to die in 
hospital in France; Shute’s parents, unlike most people, were in a position 
to drive across France to visit their dying son. When Shute eventually wrote 
about this he was forty and still missing his brother terribly14.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
organise the flow of ideas to 
maximise their effect.
Good writing flows and is easy to read. Here you will see how a 
writer can organise the flow of ideas to maximise their effect.
LINKING IDEAS
UNDERSTANDING HOW IDEAS LINK 
TOGETHER
Read through the passage about Nevil Shute. Then look at each of the 
numbered sections along with the table which shows how each of these 
sections moves the reader along through the ideas conveyed.
Try to see how the flow is maintained. For example, the first point 
concerns the movement from the idea of Shute as a well-known novelist 
to the less well-known fact that he began his professional life as an
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
CRITICAL ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING
▶
▼ IDEA PROGRESSION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
STRUCTURE
47
1 Engaging the reader
2 Contrast – unexpected
3 Moving along
4 Anticipation
5 Comparisons
6 Adding detail
7 Adding ideas
8 Explanation
9 Illustration
10 Contrast
11 Adding information
12 Adding information
13 Explanation
14 Final comment
Contrast novelist/engineer, surprising information
‘not with’ / ‘airships’ rather than ‘aeroplanes’
From engineering to writing
‘Although well-qualified…’
Educated but practical, engineering and people
Summary of a novel
Non-fiction as well as fiction
Intriguing detail
Engaging the imagination
Passengers at ease, ‘a safety rope’
Expanding a point: economics and politics covered
‘We also learn’:  preparing for a new topic
Details to help the reader understand this topic
Distanced: ‘eventually’
Find a piece of writing about a topic that you like, between one and 
two pages long. It could be on sport, music, IT, engineering, fashion, 
cooking, travel or a piece of fiction. Mark or identify each of the main 
points as they are introduced and make a list of them. Re-order the list 
if you think the flow of writing could be improved then re-write the piece 
in your own words, taking care to link your points. 
ACTIVITY 2
KEY POINT 
Writing that flows helps the reader to 
enjoy and follow a piece of writing. 
Look at the second sentence of the 
piece about Shute that refers first to 
engineering, which has already been 
established, but also to his writing, 
a theme that is taken up in the next 
paragraph.
▼ LINKING KEY POINTS AND IDEAS
▲ You could try structuring your writing around 
these images
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, CREATIVITY
aeronautical engineer. The next direction of the flow of this passage is 
provided by the information that he worked, not with aeroplanes, which 
is what we expect of aeronautical engineers, but with airships. It might 
help you to see your reading of the passage as a series of steps that 
lead you from one idea to the next, so that you follow the writer and 
understand what it is that they wants to say.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
PUNCTUATION AND SPELLING
48
Read this passage aloud.
there are three ways of ending a sentence this is very important if you do 
not punctuate sentences accurately they are very difficult to read then the 
meaning will not be clear do you understand this it is extremely important
Now read this passage, aloud.
There are three ways of ending a sentence. This is very important. If you do 
not punctuate sentences accurately they are very difficult to read. Then the 
meaning will not be clear. Do you understand this? It is extremely important!
Three ways of signalling the end of the sentences have been used. Unless you 
use a question mark for a question or an exclamation mark to stress something 
important or dramatic, you should use a full stop. In America English, full stops 
are called periods.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
control sentences accurately 
so that what is written can 
be read easily and clearly 
understood. 
Work on your own and punctuate the following passage. If you cannot 
read the passage aloud try to imagine the sound of your voice as you 
read it. Remember, each sentence must have at least one main verb.
it was night over the hill they could see the stars they had been told of 
the dangers of the area but they had decided to continue anyway soon 
they reached the first of the houses where the street took a sharp turn 
to the right soon they would be back home
ACTIVITY 1
KEY POINT
Punctuate the ends of sentences 
clearly so that they are easily read and 
easily understood.
SKILLS
INNOVATION
Questions must be finished with a question mark. They are formed in two 
ways. They may be formed with auxiliary verbs such as would, should, do, 
does, and so on. For example; Should we leave? or Does he take sugar?
Another way of forming questions involves the reversal of the subject/verb 
order in a statement. For example, Is it theirs? This form of question may 
include question words such as why, what, where, who, whom and how. For 
example, How do you like your coffee?
Exclamation marks can be used to represent strong emotions, emphasise 
points or suggest volume. They should be used sparingly so as to not lessen 
their impact.
The way in which a sentence finishes can have a dramatic impact 
on its purpose and content.
ENDING A SENTENCE 
▼ CHOOSING CLOSING PUNCTUATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
PUNCTUATION AND SPELLING
49
Commas do the following:
 
◼
indicate a pause, to leave clear a main clause:
While it was raining, they watched a film.
 
◼
separate items in a list:
For breakfast he ate cereal, toast, baked beans and two apples.
 
◼
clarify meaning by separating ideas:
His friend who had black hair was found with him. (It was his friend 
with black hair who was found with him, not one of his other friends.)
His friend, who had black hair, was found with. (This friend just 
happened to have black hair.)
 
◼
open and close direct speech:
‘Come in,’ said the doctor, ‘do sit down.’ The patient made himself 
comfortable and replied, ‘good to see you, doctor.’
‘You know,’ said the doctor, ‘it’s a good job you made this appointment.’
Notice how the actual words that are spoken are enclosed in speech 
marks, or inverted commas.
Look at this sentence:
The River Niger rises in the north of Nigeria, which takes its name from 
the river, to the north of Lake Oguta, and makes its way southwards 
towards the delta and out into the Gulf of Guinea.  
The first and second commas separate information about the origin 
of Nigeria’s name and the second and third commas separate further 
information, about the place where the river rises. These three commas 
enclose additional information that does not impede the main flow of 
the sentence. Without this information the main sections of the sentence 
would still flow together. 
The River Niger rises to the north of Lake Oguta and makes its way 
southwards towards the delta and out into the Gulf of Guinea.  
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand that a comma is 
used to indicate a pause within 
a sentence.
KEY POINT 
It is easy to read quickly from the start 
to the end of a sentence, as long as 
commas are used correctly to make 
clear the writer’s intentions.
SKILLS
INNOVATION
Insert commas where required in the following passage.
It was raining. Slowly very slowly the puddles filled dull and grey 
under the dull light. Look out! shouted Henry but it was too late. I 
told you to look where you were going. You never pay attention ever. 
Further down the road half a kilometre away an old truck started up 
misfired once or twice and began a struggle up the hill towards them.
ACTIVITY 1
Commas are essential for dictating the way in which sentences 
are read, spoken and understood. A single comma can change 
the entire meaning of a sentence.
COMMAS 
▼ USING COMMAS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
PUNCTUATION AND SPELLING
50
Read both these sentences aloud.
It’s going to be a long night and there’s nowhere to go.
It is going to be a long night and there is nowhere to go.
When you read the second sentence you have to make just a little more effort 
to read It is and there is. In speech people usually prefer to elide the i in is. 
That means the sound is suppressed or glided over for the sake of ease and 
speed. In writing, however, this is often seen as informal in style.
You can do this with other letters and, so long as you use the apostrophe, this 
will be clear to the reader. Here is another example. 
We haven’t a penny between us but she’s got plenty.
This time the o and ha sounds have been missed.
When it is possession that is to be indicated, the apostrophe usually appears 
before the s if the subject is singular and afterwards if the subject is plural.
Helen’s mother hid all her brothers’ bicycles.
With words that end in s, or words that do not take an s to show the plural 
there are two ways to punctuate possession, for example, Chris’ bike and the 
children’s clothes. Alternatively, an additional ’s can be added to names ending 
with an s: Chris’s bike. However, ensure that you remain consistent by only 
following one of these rules.
Finally, you have to remember Its and It’s. When you omit the apostrophe in its, 
it is possessive. It’s is a contraction of it is.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how apostrophes 
are used.
Insert the nine apostrophes required here.
‘Glad youve come,’ she said. ‘Ive been lookin for you everywhere. I cant 
imagine whats the matter ere.’
‘Troubles comin soon. Wed best go home.’
USING APOSTROPHES 
ACTIVITY 1
KEY POINT 
Clear use of the apostrophe allows 
quick reading and clear meaning.
SKILLS
INNOVATION
Apostrophes have two functions. They indicate the omission of 
one or more letters and, usually with the letter s, they indicate 
possession, meaning that something belongs to someone or 
something else. Like other punctuation marks, if they are used 
correctly, they help to make clear to the reader what the writer 
intended.
APOSTROPHES 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
PUNCTUATION AND SPELLING
51
Colons are used to introduce evidence or examples.
They could see what was stopping the car: a brick wedged under the tyre.
 
▶ Write three sentences using a colon like this.
Semi-colons are used to join closely related sentences or separate long items 
in a list.
It was too late; slowly he raised his hands.
They were all there; Billy who had broken his leg last year; Charlie who had 
rescued him, although he too had been wounded; and the dog. 
 
▶ Write two sentences following the first example and two following the 
second one.
Dashes are used to signal clearly the insertion of non-essential material into a 
sentence. Their purpose could be to add emphasis, to interrupt or to indicate 
an abrupt change of thought.
They were all there – two men and a dog – and she realised that the police 
would have to be called.
 
▶ Write two sentences following the pattern of this example.
 
Brackets are used to add additional material about a preceding item. 
Remember that, unlike dashes, brackets must be used in pairs.
Kevin (lead singer) and Sharon were the band’s best performers.
 
▶ Insert information in brackets about the asterisked words in the sentence 
that follows.
‘Their guide* who had joined them at the airport helped two of them* to 
carry their bags.’
 
Ellipses are used where a word is omitted and are made up of three dots (like 
full stops). It’s most useful in direct speech; when you speak, you are more 
likely to pause or break off in mid-sentence. 
He paused. ‘I don’t think I’m …’ With that he turned away.
‘If you don’t stop that I’ll, I’ll …’ Before she could finish they had drowned 
her in laughter.
 
▶ Work with a partner and construct two dialogues between two or more 
characters. Each of you should write the first line of a dialogue, then pass it 
to your partner who should write the second line. Continue like this until you 
have written at least ten lines.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how to use 
different punctuation marks.
KEY POINT 
Remember that each of these 
punctuation marks has a distinctive 
function.
COLONS
SEMI-COLONS
DASHES 
ELLIPSES
BRACKETS
There is a range of different punctuation marks, each capable 
of achieving a particular effect or changing the meaning of a 
sentence. Being able to use them all will ensure your writing is 
varied and engaging.
COLONS, SEMI-COLONS, DASHES, BRACKET, ELLIPSES
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
PUNCTUATION AND SPELLING
52
Correct spelling is something that depends on your visual memory so reading 
will help. You should also try to find ways of remembering something about the 
word, for example, stationary and stationery. 
Where a is the final vowel the word means not moving or stopped. Think of 
stopped as arrested, a word which begins with an a.
Where e is the final vowel the word refers to envelopes and writing paper
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
avoid common spelling errors.
accompany 
agreeable 
anxious 
applaud 
certificate 
civilised 
compliment
complement
conferred
deceitful 
decision 
disguise 
dumb 
engineer 
exhibition 
experiment 
fulfil 
government 
fatigue 
height 
immediately 
language 
lightening 
lightning 
naughty neighbour 
niece 
occur 
occurred privilege 
prosperous 
succession 
suspicion 
suspicious 
temperature 
thorough 
though 
thought 
tremendous 
vegetable 
ventilation 
Another way to help yourself to remember difficult spellings is to look closely 
at the word, jotted down perhaps on a scrap of paper, and try to memorise it. 
Then cover up the word while you try to write it down accurately. Repeat this 
process if necessary. (Here’s another difficult word, necessary. Remember, 
shirts are necessary – one collar and two sleeves.)
Words that contain e and i together are sometimes easier to spell if you 
remember the following mnemonic:
i before e, except after c, unless the sound matches weigh.
So you have: yield, receive, sleigh. There are exceptions such as seize.
Particularly important words that you should make an effort to spell correctly 
include:
KEY POINT 
Avoiding spelling mistakes will make 
your writing much more effective and 
engaging
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
mnemonic a device used to aid memory – 
usually in the form of a saying or rhyme
▲ Similar words, very different things
It is easy to find lists of commonly misspelt words on the internet. 
These sites often provide reminders for some spellings and 
suggest that you make a list of the words that you find difficult to 
spell.
COMMON SPELLING ERRORS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
PUNCTUATION AND SPELLING
53
 
◼
Allow your hearing (or the imagined sound of reading) to check grammar 
and punctuation. 
 
◼
Allow your sight to check spelling. If you are typing, don't rely on spell 
checkers.
 
◼
When you edit a piece of writing you have to consider the way words are 
used and put together so that you can correct errors. At the same time, 
you must consider the ideas that are conveyed and whether they could 
have been clearer and better organised.
Remember that you must do the following:
 
>
Begin a sentence with a capital letter. A capital letter marks clearly 
the start of a new sentence. Capital letters must also be used to 
mark proper nouns and all components of a proper noun, such as 
Mohammed, Singapore and Hong Kong Airport.
 
>
Stop sentences clearly with a full stop, a question mark or an 
exclamation mark. Use these punctuation marks in direct speech to 
mark the end of a spoken sentence. 
 
>
Use commas for pauses and lists, as well as for clarifying information 
and in direct speech. Here the commas indicate the pauses as we 
read, to help indicate the words that are actually spoken. 
Marie uttered the words, ‘You fool!’ She swallowed hard before continuing. 
‘What do you think you’re doing?’ She raised her mobile. ‘The police,’ she 
said, ‘the police will like this when I send it.’ 
When you want to include additional information without interrupting the flow 
of the sentence you must choose between dashes and brackets: 
 
>
Dashes lead the eye to the next word so that the additional information 
can be easily taken in as we read on. For example, ‘It was light – the 
sort of morning that calls to early risers – so staying in bed seemed 
sinful.’ 
 
>
Brackets allow the insertion of shorter, more practical items of 
information. For example, ‘Take out the flour (wholemeal, remember) 
and weigh out 200 grammes.’
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
start checking your writing 
automatically.
Like any practical activity, writing will improve with practice. 
Write regularly, at least ten minutes a day and always check your 
writing as you go. It’s a good idea to check each paragraph as 
you proceed and that way you will also have a second look at 
your ideas and an opportunity to consider again how you will lead 
your ideas into the next paragraph.
Spelling, punctuation and grammar must all come together when 
you write. In practice you have been able to deal with them 
separately, but when you write you have to cope with all of them 
at once.
IMPROVE YOUR WRITING
TIPS TO REMEMBER
KEY POINT 
Remember that your aim should 
always be to write clearly, accurately 
and effectively. As you write ask 
yourself, is this clear, is this accurate, 
will this be effective when someone 
else reads it?
▲ Listening to how your writing reads is almost 
as important as reading it thoroughly when 
checking your work
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
PUNCTUATION AND SPELLING
54
When proof-reading, ask yourself the following questions. 
 
▶ Are words spelt and ordered correctly? 
 
▶ Are words changed where necessary so that they work together?
 
▶ Do the words flow when read out loud? If you are unable to read aloud, try 
imagining reading aloud instead.
 
▶ Have you double checked?
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
detect items that require 
correction or that could be 
improved.
There are two important aspects of checking what has been written:
Proof-reading: marking errors in a draft
Editing: looking for opportunities to modify and improve the material
PROOF-READING, CHECKING AND EDITING
PROOF-READING: MECHANICAL 
ACCURACY
EDITING
When editing, ask yourself the following questions:
 
▶ Do the ideas flow? 
 
▶ Are they easy to follow?
 
▶ Could more effective words be chosen?
 
▶ Could the presentation of ideas be more effective? 
SKILLS
INNOVATION
Work on your own or with a partner and correct the highlighted errors 
in the first sentence below. Then identify and correct the errors in the 
second sentence.
There is a hard frost which have been anticipating for some days. 
Many of the smaler animals had burrow deeply but, fortunately for 
them, heavy rain then caused the river to bursted it’s banks and many 
of them was drowned.  
▼ FINDING ERRORS
ACTIVITY 1
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

WRITING SKILLS
VOCABULARY
55
Proofreading and editing are essential to any form of writing. Even the 
best ideas or most carefully thought out argument can benefit from these 
processes, ensuring they are as engaging and effective as possible. Spelling 
mistakes, grammatical errors or poorly constructed sentences can greatly 
lessen the impact of a piece of writing, so it is important to carefully check 
your work and ensure it is of the best possible quality.
KEY POINT 
Language is firstly a spoken matter, 
something understood through hearing 
before reading or writing. One of the 
best ways of checking written material 
is to read it aloud.
When checking your work, you should try 
to imagine the sound of a voice reading 
it aloud. Remember that the purpose of 
writing accurately is to make it easy for 
someone to read it and understand it 
with little effort. This is what you should 
check for when proof-reading and editing 
a piece of writing, whether it is your own 
or someone else’s.
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, INNOVATION
Work on your own and read through these two sentences and edit 
them, choosing more effective words where you can and re-ordering 
them where this will improve the passage.
Across the river he could see the old railway track which had been on 
the sea-wall. No trains had been seen there for half a century but now 
a bunch of men who gathered in the Railway Arms, a well-known 
public house, had decided to campaign for its restoration. One of his 
neighbours, now in his eighties, remembered the sound of the whistle 
from the midday train which was his signal to stop work in the fields 
and go home for lunch.
▼ EDITING TEXT
ACTIVITY 2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
57
PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
57
NON-FICTION AND 
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
PAPER 1
57
Assessment Objective 1 
Read and understand a 
variety of texts, selecting and 
interpreting information, ideas 
and perspectives
Assessment Objective 2 
Understand and analyse how 
writers use linguistic and 
structural devices to achieve 
their effects
Assessment Objective 3 
Explore links and connections 
between writers’ ideas and 
perspectives, as well as how 
these are conveyed
Assessment Objective 4 
Communicate effectively and 
imaginatively, adapting form, 
tone and register of writing 
for specific purposes and 
audiences
Assessment Objective 5 
Write clearly, using a range 
of vocabulary and sentence 
structures, with appropriate 
paragraphing and accurate 
spelling, grammar and 
punctuation
In Paper 1, the assessment 
objectives are worth the 
following amounts:
AO1 – 7%
AO2 – 8%
AO3 – 15%
AO4 – 18%
AO5 – 12%
This chapter focuses on Paper 1: Non-fiction and 
Transactional Writing of the English Language A course. 
Working through these lessons and activities will help you to 
develop the reading and writing skills that you will need for 
the Paper 1 exam.
The chapter is split into the following sections:
◼ Non-fiction texts
◼ Text anthology: Non-fiction
◼ Comparing texts
◼ Transactional writing
Paper 1 is worth 60% of the total marks for the course and is 
split into two sections:
◼ Section A: Non-fiction
◼ Section B: Transactional writing
In section A of your exam, you will need to be able to meet 
Assessment Objectives AO1, AO2 and AO3.
In section B of your exam, you will need to be able to meet Assessment Objectives AO4 and AO5.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
58
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand some of the 
features of non-text genres 
and prepare you to answer 
exam questions on them.
The specification lists examples of the possible types of text that 
may appear in Paper 1:
 
◼ biography or autobiography 
 
◼ obituaries
 
◼ speeches
 
◼ newspaper or magazine 
articles 
 
◼ travel writing
 
◼ diaries or letters 
 
◼ reviews
 
◼ reference books.
TYPES OF TEXT
The texts that you will write about in Paper 1 will be non-fiction. Fiction 
describes scenes imagined (at least partly) by the writer. Non-fiction writing 
does the opposite: it is about things that really happened, although we cannot 
rely on all non-fiction to be accurate.
In an autobiography, the writer describes his or her own life. However, some 
events may not have been remembered accurately, or some events may be 
exaggerated for effect, perhaps to show the writer as positively as possible. 
Some autobiographies may be considered more like fiction than non-fiction by 
their readers because they are not very accurate.
A biography is the life story of a famous or interesting person, whether from 
history or from the present day. Today, there are also ‘authorised biographies’, 
in which the subject of the biography gives the writer specific legal permission 
to produce the biography. The subject can decide which events are included 
or omitted and how the writer describes them.
Another form of autobiographical writing is the diary or journal, or the modern 
equivalent, the blog (short for ‘web log’). For example, The Diary of a Young 
Girl by Anne Frank contains important factual material about her daily life 
during the German occupation of the Netherlands. It is therefore more than just 
a personal account. (However, not all diaries set out to be accurate or truthful. 
Many diaries have other purposes, such as to entertain, to give personal views 
and to communicate with friends.
News reports may appear in newspapers or magazines. News is expected 
to be objective, or unbiased, and based on clear evidence. As readers, we  
want to know whether a reporter is trying to present the material in a particular 
way because of their own opinions on the topic. However, some newspaper 
and magazine articles are undoubtedly biased. In all forms of non-fiction text, 
therefore, the question of truth and accuracy really matters. This means that 
part of the reader’s analysis should include looking for any examples of bias or 
opinion that is not supported by evidence.
Feature articles are usually about a topic of interest to a large number of 
readers: they can be about almost anything, from family matters to global 
politics. They are usually based on research. Opinion or comment pieces will 
contain factual evidence and explanation, but aim to argue a case about a 
topic of general interest.
An obituary is a newspaper article, found most frequently in broadsheet 
newspapers, about a remarkable or well-known person who has just died. Its 
length depends on the fame or significance of the subject. 
▶
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
objective based on facts, or making a 
decision that is based on facts rather than 
on your feelings or beliefs
unbiased fair because not influenced by 
one’s own or someone else’s opinions
broadsheet a newspaper printed on large 
sheets of paper, especially a serious 
newspaper
KEY POINT
All non-fiction writing describes real 
events but, depending on the genre, 
the authors gives their own account. 
The ‘truth’ of their account can be 
questioned.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
59
Read the following extract from an autobiography that tells Ellen MacArthur’s 
account of her extraordinary life as a lone yachtswoman. While reading it, think 
about what MacArthur is writing about and how she has written her account.
Which of the types of text described above do you think the following 
extracts come from? Give reasons for your decision. Which one do you 
think is more objective? Explain why you think this.
Even the keenest gamers generally suffer nothing more than sore thumbs 
or tired eyes from their hobby. But scientists looking into the health effects 
of video game consoles have linked overplaying to dozens of injuries 
– some even life-threatening. The cases were uncovered after a team of 
Dutch researchers gathered all reported cases of Nintendo-related injuries, 
spanning 30 years.
On a low stool stood a mountainous plate of sheep parts, with the 
favoured cut, the great fatty tail, like a grey glacier on its summit. Younger 
sisters hustled in and out making last-minute preparations. While we were 
at breakfast the first lookouts were posted to watch for the return of the 
truck bearing the wedding party from the bride’s camp. 
ACTIVITY 1
▼  FROM THE INDEPENDENT NEWSPAPER:
▼  FROM MONGOLIAN WEDDING, BY STANLEY STEWART
▼  FROM TAKING ON THE WORLD,  BY ELLEN MACARTHUR
BIOGRAPHY AND AUTOBIOGRAPHY 
The wind continued to rise during the first few days, and by the third I was 
changing down to the storm jib on the foredeck, and was thrown off my 
feet before cracking my head hard against the inner forestay rod, resulting 
in an instant lump and a strange nausea. Soon afterwards, the weather front 
passed, only to bring even stronger 55-knot gusts in a steady 45-knot wind. 
It was an unreal, crazy situation: just trying to hang on inside the boat took 
every ounce of strength. Food was hurled around the cabin along with water 
containers and spares, while I tried to scrape things up and put them back in 
the boxes. My hands stung, my eye was swollen, and my wrists were already 
covered in open sores. …. 
Dawn brought some respite. My body temperature warmed after the freezing 
night, but if I sweated through the physical exertion of a sail change, when I 
stopped, I’d once again cool to a shiver. Sleep proved virtually impossible – 
just snatched ten-minute bursts ended by the cold. 
▶
▼  IDENTIFYING TYPES OF NON-FICTION
jib A small sail.
foredeck The deck near the bows of the 
yacht.
forestay Another sail.
knot A nautical mile per hour.
▲ Yachtswoman Dame Ellen MacArthur
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, REASONING, 
DECISION MAKING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
60
Just two days later conditions began to worsen again. Doing anything 
was not only difficult but painful. My hands were red-raw and swollen, 
and my head was aching – even more so when the freezing water washed 
breathtakingly over it each time I went forward to change sails. Shifting the 
sails was hard, brutal work. Whenever it was time to change one I would 
pull it forward, clipping myself on and hanging on for dear life. Waves would 
continuously power down the side-decks, often washing me and the sail back 
a couple of metres, and I had to hang on and tighten my grip on the sail tie 
even further. I would often cry out loud as I dragged the sail along; it was 
one way of letting out some of that frustration and of finding the strength to 
do it…
After a week things finally began to calm, and with my legs red-hot and sore, 
and my wrists and fingers swollen, I finally enjoyed the first opportunity to 
remove my survival suit. Though the relief was wonderful, the smell was not! 
HINT
You will need to analyse the techniques 
used by the writer in order to meet 
Assessment Objective 2. Think about:
 
◼
the story or narrative and what 
actually happened
 
◼
use of precise detail
 
◼
frequent use of personal pronouns
 
◼
first person perspective maintained 
throughout
 
◼
use of emotive language
 
◼
use of descriptive language.
Questions 1, 2 and 3 in the exam require short answers, each of which 
is usually worth between 2 and 5 marks. The number of marks on offer 
will give you a good idea about how many points you should make and 
how much you should write.
Some questions will say that you should answer ‘in your own words’. 
Copying phrases and sentences straight from the text is not a good 
idea, unless the question specifically says that it is acceptable to do so.
 
▶ In your own words, explain clearly the injury Ellen MacArthur suffered 
at the start of the passage. (2 marks)
In answering this question, you could begin: Ellen was thrown by the 
storm against ….
 
▶ Look again at the last paragraph (paragraph 4). In your own words, 
say what impressions you get of Ellen MacArthur’s feelings at the end 
of the passage and why she felt like this. (3 marks).
Choose two or three of the techniques in the ‘Hint’ box, then find an 
example or two of each technique and describe what you think the 
effects are.
ACTIVITY 2
▼  PREPARING FOR THE EXAM QUESTIONS
KEY POINT
Read the exam questions carefully. 
Tailor your answer to the number of 
marks available and make sure you 
follow the key instructions.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
61
An obituary is a very abbreviated biographical sketch of a remarkable person 
in the form of a newspaper article. These are usually published in newspapers 
shortly after their death has been announced. The length of obituaries varies, 
but an important world leader is likely to get a full page. Here are extracts 
from two examples: one for Nelson Mandela, who after years of imprisonment 
eventually became president of post-apartheid South Africa, and the other 
for David Bowie, the famous musician. Both are taken from The Guardian 
newspaper.
OBITUARIES
Mandela greatly enjoyed university, particularly boxing and athletics, and, 
on the strength of his first-year studies in English, anthropology, politics, 
native administration and Roman-Dutch law, nursed an ambition to become 
a civil servant and interpreter – about as high a position as a black man 
might aspire to in those days. But his ambition seemed to be crushed when, 
in 1940, in his second year, as a member of the student representative 
council he was expelled for his part in a rebellion over poor quality food. He 
returned to Mqhekezweni to find another potential disaster – an arranged 
marriage was being planned for him.
▼  ‘NELSON MANDELA OBITUARY’, FROM THE GUARDIAN
In July 1969 Bowie released Space Oddity, the song that would give him his 
initial commercial breakthrough. Timed to coincide with the Apollo 11 moon 
landing, it was a top five UK hit. The accompanying album was originally 
called Man of Words / Man of Music, but was later reissued as Space Oddity.
The following year was a momentous one for Bowie. His brother Terry was 
committed to a psychiatric institution (and would kill himself in 1985), and 
his father died. In March, Bowie married Angela Barnett, an art student. 
He dumped Pitt [his manager] and recruited the driven and aggressive Tony 
DeFries, prompting Pitt to sue successfully for compensation. Artistically, 
Bowie was powering ahead. The Man Who Sold the World was released in 
the US in late 1970 and in the UK the following year under Bowie’s new deal 
with RCA Victor, and with its daring songwriting and broody, hard-rock 
sound, it was the first album to do full justice to his writing and performing 
gifts.
▼  ‘DAVID BOWIE OBITUARY’, FROM THE GUARDIAN
▲ Nelson Mandela
▲ David Bowie
GENERAL VOCABULARY
apartheid the former political and social 
system in South Africa, in which only white 
people had full political rights and people 
of other races, especially black people, 
were forced to go to separate schools, live 
in separate areas, etc. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
62
Speeches can be given for many different reasons. Lawyers make speeches 
in court for the defence or the prosecution. People make speeches in debates 
or after formal dinners to entertain an audience. However, the most famous 
speeches are those made by politicians as part of campaigns. The purpose 
of such speeches is often to rally supporters and give listeners a sense of 
purpose and inspiration.
The following speech was made by the American civil rights campaigner, 
Martin Luther King Junior, who was later assassinated for his beliefs and his 
work on behalf of black Americans.
Obituaries are often sympathetic accounts of someone’s achievements.
 
▶ How does the writer of the Mandela extract begin to influence the 
reader’s sympathies? 
 
▶ What makes these extracts more appropriate for obituaries than for 
biographies?
Copy and complete the following table, finding examples of the 
methods and techniques in the two extracts and commenting on their 
effect. Now identify some methods for yourself, remembering to back 
them up with evidence from the text and comment on their effect.
▼  METHOD OR 
TECHNIQUE
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  COMMENT ON 
EFFECT
Formal register 
Focus on factual 
information
Conciseness of writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACTIVITY 3
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
register the type or style of vocabulary 
used according to the situation
SPEECHES
▼  IDENTIFYING TECHNIQUES IN OBITUARIES
As you read the speech, think about how Martin Luther King shows his 
listeners that he is fighting for a better and fairer society in America, using 
techniques such as: 
 
◼
repetition of key words 
 
◼
repetition of the beginning of sentences
 
◼
reference to particular individuals
 
◼
use of geographical references (i.e. different parts of the United States)
 
◼
describing the difficulties black people have faced over the years
 
◼
the idea of bringing all people together
 
◼
the use of words from a patriotic song.
▲ Martin Luther King at the March in 
Washington rally in August 1963.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
63
I have a dream…
I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true 
meaning of its creed: ‘We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are 
created equal.’
I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former 
slaves and the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down together 
at the table of brotherhood.
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where 
they will not be judged by the colour of their skin but by the content of their 
character.
I have a dream today!
And this will be the day – this will be the day when all of God’s children will 
be able to sing with new meaning:
My country ’tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing.
Land where my fathers died, land of the Pilgrim’s pride,
From every mountainside, let freedom ring!
And if America is to be a great nation, this must become true.
And so let freedom ring from the prodigious hilltops of New Hampshire.
Let freedom ring from the mighty mountains of New York.
Let freedom ring from the heightening Alleghenies of Pennsylvania……
Let freedom ring from every hill and molehill of Mississippi.
From every mountainside, let freedom ring.
And when this happens, when we allow freedom ring, when we let it ring 
from every village and every hamlet, from every state and every city, we will 
be able to speed up that day when all of God’s children, black men and white 
men, Jews and Gentiles, Protestants and Catholics, will be able to join hands 
and sing in the words of the old Negro spiritual:
Free at last! Free at last!
Thank God Almighty, we are free at last!
all men are created equal A quotation 
from the US Declaration of Independence, 
written just before the start of the war 
against Great Britain. 
Georgia Southern American slave-owning 
state before the American Civil War.
colour of their skin but by the 
content of their character Note the 
alliteration of the sound /k/ five times.
let freedom ring Part of the US National 
Anthem.
New York New York State, which is very 
large.
Alleghenies A range of hills.
the old Negro spiritual A traditional 
hymn-like song of the Afro-Caribbeans, often 
originating during the era of slavery.
▼   ‘I HAVE A DREAM’, BY MARTIN LUTHER KING AT  
WASHINGTON DC, AUGUST 1963
The art of persuasive writing and speaking is called rhetoric. Rhetorical 
devices include many techniques used in poetry, since they can make all 
kinds of writing more memorable. These techniques include alliteration, 
onomatopoeia, figurative language (similes, metaphors and personification), 
emotive language and word choices.
HINT
Although you will be given credit for 
knowing and identifying techniques, many 
more marks go to good explanations of 
their effects, of why they are used, than 
to mere technique-spotting.
KEY POINT
Look at the way an author has used 
the technical devices of language 
to persuade the reader of a certain 
viewpoint. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
64
HINT
Some people find acronyms helpful 
in remembering lists of terms. We’ve 
suggested ‘HER CRASH FACTOR’S L’ for the 
following rhetorical techniques, but try to 
think of your own if you can.
H 
Hyperbole or exaggeration
E 
Emotive language
R 
Register
C 
Contrast
R 
Repetition
A 
Alliteration and assonance
S 
Structure
H 
Humour
F 
Figurative language (similes, etc.)
A 
Antithesis 
C 
Contrast
T 
Tripling
O 
Onomatopoeia
R 
Rhetorical questions (and other 
rhetorical devices)
S 
Short sentences or paragraphs
L  Lists
Effective speeches will nearly always have a strong appeal to the 
listeners’ feelings. Copy and complete the following table to help you to 
analyse how Martin Luther King achieves this.
▼ APPEALS TO
▼ QUOTATION
▼ COMMENT 
Love of justice 
and fairness 
Patriotism 
Idealism 
 
‘they will not be judged 
by the colour of their 
skin’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▶ How does Martin Luther King build up a strong impression of the 
rightness of his cause in this extract?
ACTIVITY 5
HINT
Structure is a key rhetorical method used 
to build up a feeling or an argument.
▼  APPEALING TO LISTENERS’ FEELINGS
Look again at the list of techniques above the extract. Copy and 
complete the following table, adding techniques and giving an example 
or two of each.
▼ METHOD OR TECHNIQUE
▼ EFFECT 
Repetition of key words
Geographical names
 
▶ Pick out two quotations from the passage which give you the idea that 
Martin Luther King believes strongly in a fair society for people of all 
kinds. In each case, say why the language is so successful.
 
▶ Give three examples of rhetoric used in the extract and explain why 
they are effective.
ACTIVITY 4
▼  IDENTIFYING TECHNIQUES USED IN SPEECHES
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
65
Many people express their most personal thoughts about their lives in writing 
that is less planned and more informal than an autobiography. This can be 
done either in a diary that they write regularly – often to an imaginary friend, 
such as Anne Frank’s ‘Kitty’ – or in a letter to someone close: a friend, a 
lover or a relative. This means that the perspective of diaries and letters is 
personal, and many writers of diaries and letters did not originally intend them 
to be published. Remember that someone’s thoughts and feelings can be an 
important part of a non-fiction text, just like in fiction.
Some of the most powerful diaries and letters that have been published give 
us a remarkable understanding of the suffering of individuals in wartime. Anne 
Frank’s diary, published as The Diary of a Young Girl, gives us a remarkable 
understanding of the suffering of individuals in wartime. Anne was a Dutch 
teenager who kept a diary over a period of two years during the Second World 
War. As she and her family were Jewish, they hid from the Nazis in a house 
in Amsterdam. The diary entries ended when the Frank family was eventually 
found and arrested. Anne was sent to a concentration camp, where she died. 
The following extract comes from the early months of Anne’s period in hiding.
DIARIES
HINT
As you read the passage, think about:
 
◼
the age of the girl who is writing the 
diary
 
◼
signs of her ability to write in an 
unusually mature way about what she 
is experiencing
 
◼
her explanation as to why she writes 
the diary.
▼  THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL BY ANNE FRANK
‘Paper has more patience than people.’ I thought of this saying on one of 
those days when I was feeling a little depressed and was sitting at home with 
my chin in my hands, bored and listless, wondering whether to stay in or 
go out. I finally stayed where I was, brooding. Yes, paper does have more 
patience, and since I’m not planning to let anyone else read this stiff-backed 
notebook grandly referred to as a ‘diary’, unless I should ever find a real 
friend, it probably won’t make a bit of difference.
Now I’m back to the point that prompted me to keep a diary in the first 
place: I don’t have a friend.
Let me put it more clearly, since no one will believe that a thirteen-year-old 
girl is completely alone in the world. And I’m not. I have loving parents and 
a sixteen-year-old sister, and there are about thirty people I can call friends. 
I have a throng of admirers who can’t keep their adoring eyes off me and 
who sometimes have to resort to using a broken pocket mirror to try and 
catch a glimpse of me in the classroom. I have a family, loving aunts and a 
good home. No, on the surface I seem to have everything, except my one true 
friend. All I think about when I’m with friends is having a good time. I can’t 
bring myself to talk about anything but ordinary everyday things. We don’t 
seem to be able to get any closer, and that’s the problem. Maybe it’s my fault 
that we don’t confide in each other. In any case, that’s just how things are, 
and unfortunately they’re not liable to change. This is why I’ve started the 
diary.
people Anne personifies the paper.
home Is it surprising to find that a diary is 
preoccupied with family and friends?
time Notice the informal register here.
KEY POINT
The most famous published diaries 
show that the personal viewpoint can 
be an extremely powerful tool in non-
fiction writing.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
66
Vera Brittain was a writer who worked as a nurse during the First World War. 
Her letters, sent to her friends, family and fiancé from her nursing posts, are a 
powerful record of traumatic wartime experiences. The following extract comes 
from a letter that she wrote to her family, giving her honest views about the 
things that she saw and did as a nurse to injured soldiers. 
LETTERS
Write an answer for each of the following questions. A student answer 
for question 2 has been included to give you an idea of what you should 
be aiming to produce.
1 What reason does Anne give for keeping a diary?  
(1 mark)
2 In your own words, say how the final paragraph develops this 
thought. (4 marks)
3 Pick out two phrases which show that, at times, Anne is still quite 
young in her way of thinking and comment on each.  
(4 marks)
STUDENT ANSWER TO QUESTION 2
 
▶ How many marks out of 4 might you give this answer and 
why? For example, do you think it is perceptive or superficial, 
well-developed or lacking in evidence?
ACTIVITY 6
▼  INTERPRETING WRITING
The statement that Anne does not have a friend is explored in an 
interesting way in the final paragraph. Anne distinguishes in quite a 
mature way between having a loving family and many people who 
admire her, although this may be ironic, and having someone in 
whom she can really confide. She recognises that her life is going 
to be extremely difficult, and that she risks feeling isolated from the 
community. She regrets the superficial relationship that she has with her 
friends, and is looking for some deeper and more trusting relationship. 
Possibly acute surgical is the heaviest type of work there is, I think, more 
wearing than anything else on earth. You are kept on the go the whole time 
but in the end there seems to be nothing definite to show for it – except that 
one or two are still alive that might otherwise have been dead. The hospital is 
very heavy now… – the convoys keep coming down, two or three a night… 
Sometimes in the middle of the night we have to turn people out of bed and 
make them sleep on the floor to make room for the more seriously ill ones 
who have come down from the line. We have heaps of gassed cases at present 
who came in a day or two ago; there are 10 in this ward alone. I wish those 
people who write so glibly about this being a Holy war, and the orators who 
talk so much about going on no matter how long the War lasts and what it 
▼  A LETTER BY VERA BRITTAIN
▶
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, PROBLEM SOLVING, 
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION
This text is to be 
replaced with new 
copy, which we don’t 
have yet!
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
67
may mean, could see a case – to say nothing of 10 cases of mustard gas in its 
early stages – could see the poor things all burnt and blistered all over with 
great mustard-coloured blisters, with blind eyes – sometimes temporarily, 
sometimes permanently – all sticky and stuck together, and always fighting 
for breath, their voices a whisper, saying their throats are closing and they 
know they will choke.
The strain is very, very great. The enemy is within shelling distance – refugee 
sisters crowding in with nerves all awry – bright moonlight, and aeroplanes 
carrying machine guns – ambulance trains jolting into the siding, all day, all 
night – gassed men on stretchers clawing the air – dying men reeking with 
mud and foul green stained bandages, shrieking and writhing in a grotesque 
travesty of manhood – dead men with fixed empty eyes and shiny yellow 
faces.
Read the passage again and think about:
 
◼
the working day that Vera Brittain describes
 
◼
why she feels that everything is up to her
 
◼
her attitude to the deaths that she has seen so often
 
◼
the reasons for her bitterness.
Before answering the questions, pick out (by underlining, highlighting or 
writing out) the key sentences or phrases you will need for your answer. 
Think about how you can re-word them in your own words.
1 Explain in your own words why Vera finds ‘acute surgical’ the most 
tiring kind of work, as described in the first paragraph of the extract. 
(3 marks)
2 Explain in your own words how the last paragraph gives a real sense 
of the horror of Vera’s experiences of war. (2 marks)
3 Both the passages are about a young woman’s experience of 
difficulties and hardships in a time of war. What similarities and 
differences do you find in the attitudes of the two writers? (10 marks)
4 Fill in the gaps in the following answer with the suggested words 
in the box. In some cases, more than one of these words may be 
suitable.
Anne 
dreadful 
feelings 
ideas 
trapped 
writing 
awful 
events 
war 
similarities 
horrible 
Vera 
friend 
differences 
person 
thoughts 
experiences 
injuries 
soldiers
ACTIVITY 7
HINT
Question 5 in Section A you need to 
compare the two passages on the paper in 
some detail. In the exam, this question will 
carry about half of the marks for the paper.
▼  PREPARING FOR EXAM QUESTIONS
▶
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING, DECISION MAKING
KEY POINT
The strong impact of letters comes 
from their directness, often written 
soon after the author’s experiences.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
68
A lot of writing, both fiction and non-fiction, deals with travel. When it is non-
fiction, travel writing is generally autobiographical in form. Travel writers usually 
try to record their actual experiences. Ask yourself a series of questions about 
the writing:
 
◼
Does the writer bring the events to life, so that you can really imagine the 
people, and picture the place and the way of life there? How do they do 
this?
 
◼
What attitudes does the writer show towards the places visited? Are there 
feelings of amazement, delight, humour or sadness?
 
◼
Why is the writer telling you about his or her travels? Is it to make you want 
to visit the place? To entertain you? To enable you to experience places 
and people that you may never be able to visit personally?
 
◼
Does the writer bring out the ways in which customs, clothing, food or 
traditions differ from those you are used to?
The following two extracts are about the writers’ experiences in different 
places: one is describing Mongolia, while the other is describing Africa. 
In Mongolian Wedding, Stanley Stewart sees the beauty and fun of the events 
he watches and wishes to share his enjoyment with the reader, by bringing 
events to life as vividly as he can. As you read the passage, think about:
 
◼
whether this wedding seems like weddings that you have witnessed
 
◼
how the writer felt as someone not used to these traditions
 
◼
signs that, at times, he found the celebrations very amusing
 
◼
the way that presents a detailed picture of events.
TRAVEL WRITING
There are more ______________ than ________________ in the way the 
two young women experience ____ and its horrors. This is partly because 
Anne is ________ indoors, so has not actually seen the suffering of the 
___________. Vera, however, has to work under ____________ conditions to 
look after those who have received terrible _____________. Both write about 
themselves, and both are sharing their innermost _________ with someone 
special, even if in _________’s case this is not a real ________. The power of 
______’s graphic descriptions gives a really vivid impression of war, whereas 
in this extract, Anne seems more preoccupied with the act of ___________ a 
diary than with recording important ____________.
◀  A scene from 
a Mongolian 
Wedding
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
69
ger Mongolian home.
Rolls Rolls Royce, a luxury make of car that 
is often used for weddings.
Ideal Gers A play on the name of a British 
magazine, Ideal Home. 
arrayed Arranged.
arkhi A clear spirit distilled from milk.
lavish Very generous.
dishevelled Disordered, disarranged.
terra firma [Latin] Solid ground.
tailgate The back end of the truck.
Throughout the evening people came to warn me about themselves. They 
sat on the grass outside my tent, unburdening themselves with pre-emptive 
confessions. The following day would be difficult, they said. Weddings 
were boisterous occasions. People became unpredictable. They counselled 
me about particular individuals, then admitted that they themselves could 
be as bad as the next fellow. I would be wise to get away early before 
things got out of hand.
In the morning the groom and his supporters, a party of about seven or 
eight relations, set off to fetch the bride from her ger, which lay some 15 
miles away. An old Russian truck, the equivalent of the wedding Rolls, 
had been specially hired for the occasion.
When they arrived the groom would be obliged to search for his bride 
who by tradition must hide from him. It would not be too difficult. The 
tradition is that she hides under a bed in the neighbouring ger. While we 
waited for their return we were given breakfast in the newlyweds’ ger. 
Over the past weeks it had been lovingly prepared by relations. It was like 
a show ger from Ideal Gers… Biscuits, slabs of white cheese and boiled 
sweets had been arrayed on every surface in dizzy tiers like wedding 
cakes. On a low stool stood a mountainous plate of sheep parts, with the 
favoured cut, the great fatty tail, like a grey glacier on its summit.
Younger sisters hustled in and out making last-minute preparations. While 
we were at breakfast the first lookouts were posted to watch for the return 
of the truck bearing the wedding party from the bride’s camp. By mid-
afternoon we were still waiting. Apparently a wedding breakfast would 
have been given to the groom and his accompanying party at the bride’s 
camp, and complicated calculations were now performed concerning 
the number of miles to the bride’s ger, divided by the speed of the truck 
combined with the probable duration of the breakfast, and finally 
multiplied by the estimated consumption of arkhi.
At four o’clock a spiral of dust finally appeared beyond a distant ridge. 
When the truck drew up in front of the wedding ger, it was clear that 
the lavish hospitality of the bride’s camp had been the cause of the delay. 
The back of the truck was crammed with wedding guests in such a state 
of dishevelled merriment that we had some difficulty persuading them to 
disembark. The bride’s mother, apparently convinced that they were at 
the wrong ger, required four men to convey her to terra firma. The bride’s 
elder sister, shrugging off all assistance, fell headfirst from the tailgate, 
bounced twice and came to rest, smiling, against a door post.
▼  MONGOLIAN WEDDING BY STANLEY STEWART
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
70
1 In paragraph 2, there is a custom involving a bride. What is it?  
(1 mark)
2 Describe the features of the preparations that take place in the 
newlyweds’ ger. (4 marks)
3 Why is the description of the arrival of the truck humorous? (4 marks)
These three questions are similar to Questions 1–3 in Paper 1.
The following question is a Question 3 type, and is worth 11 or 12 
marks.
 
▶ In what ways does the writer make this passage entertaining? 
In your answer you should write about: 
 
◼
the writer’s account of what happened
 
◼
his handling of pace and suspense or anticipation
 
◼
his descriptions of unusual things or customs 
 
◼
his use of language. 
Support your answer with examples from the extract.
ACTIVITY 8
▼  PREPARING FOR EXAM QUESTIONS
The following passage is an example of a very different kind of travel writing. 
While you are reading it, consider what makes it different from the previous 
extract.
I was in a little hamlet just outside Gufgaduud, a village in the back of 
beyond… In the ghoulish manner of journalists on the hunt for the most 
striking pictures, my cameraman and I tramped from one hut to another. 
What might have appalled us when we’d started our trip just a few days 
before no longer impressed us much.
There was Amina Abdirahman, who had gone out that morning in search 
of wild, edible roots, leaving her two young girls lying on the dirt floor 
of their hut. They had been sick for days, and were reaching the final, 
enervating stages of terminal hunger. Habiba was ten years old and her 
sister, Ayaan, was nine. By the time Amina returned, she had only one 
daughter. Habiba had died. No rage, no whimpering, just a passing away – 
that simple, frictionless, motionless deliverance from a state of half-life to 
death itself. It was, as I said at the time in my dispatch, a vision of ‘famine 
away from the headlines, a famine of quiet suffering and lonely death’. 
▼  FROM A PASSAGE TO AFRICA BY GEORGE ALAGIAH
▶
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING, INTERPRETATION
KEY POINT
Include details of the circumstances 
and events. You should not try to 
summarise the whole extract, but focus 
on key moments and explain why you 
think the writer included these details.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
71
Reading newspapers or magazines fairly regularly will not only improve your 
reading and writing skills; it will also steadily increase your general knowledge 
and understanding of current affairs. Many newspapers and magazines now 
exist in online versions, which makes them much easier to access.
Articles come in various types and lengths. They can be about anything 
of general current interest, from politics and economics to shopping and 
education. Articles may or may not express strong views or come to definite 
conclusions about the topic, but they usually inform us of developments, make 
us aware of things of interest and warn us of dangers. The following articles do 
express opinions meaning that they are known as ‘opinion pieces’. In opinion 
pieces, it is particularly important that the views are well argued and backed 
up by evidence.
NEWSPAPER AND MAGAZINE 
ARTICLES 
There was the old woman who lay in her hut, abandoned by relations 
who were too weak to carry her on their journey to find food. It was the 
smell that drew me to her doorway: the smell of decaying flesh. Where 
her shinbone should have been there was a festering wound the size of 
my hand. She’d been shot in the leg as the retreating army of the deposed 
dictator took revenge on whoever it found in its way. The shattered leg 
had fused into the gentle V-shape of a boomerang. It was rotting; she was 
rotting. You could see it in her sick, yellow eyes and smell it in the putrid 
air she recycled with every struggling breath she took.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS,  
INTERPRETATION, DECISION MAKING
HINT
What particular effects do different writers 
use to interest the reader? For example, 
the use of emotive description in A 
Passage to Africa and the use of dramatic 
words and comic situations in Mongolian 
Wedding.
This is the type of question you will have to answer when tackling 
Question 5 of Section A. It carries roughly half the marks for the section 
in the exam (22 marks out of 45).
1 Compare how the writers of these two travel pieces present their 
ideas and perspectives on their experiences. Support your answer 
with detailed examples from both texts including brief quotations.  
(22 marks)
Read the information in the box in the margin, then copy and complete 
the table to help you plan your answer.
▼  METHOD/
TECHNIQUE
▼  MONGOLIA
▼  AFRICA
▼  COMPARISON
Type of detail or 
incident 
Communication 
of thoughts and 
attitudes 
Language
Strange, odd or 
comical  
Example:
In describing the 
strange customs, 
his tone is…  
Example:
Distressing 
Example: 
By focusing on 
the sad fates of 
individuals, he… 
Example:
They are describing 
very different types 
of…
 
 
 
COMPARING TEXTS 1 AND 2
ACTIVITY 9
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
72
▼   ‘SOCIAL MEDIA ADDICTION IS A BIGGER PROBLEM THAN 
YOU THINK’ BY MIKE ELGAN FOR COMPUTER WORLD 
Social networks are massively addictive. Most people I know check and 
interact on social sites constantly throughout the day. And they have no idea 
how much actual time they spend on social media.
If you’re a social media addict, and your addiction is getting worse, there’s 
a reason for that: Most of the major social network companies, as well as 
social content creators, are working hard every day to make their networks 
so addictive that you can’t resist them.
Cornell Information Science published research earlier this month that 
looked at (among other things) the difficulty some people have in quitting 
Facebook and other social networks. They even have a label for the failure to 
quit: ‘social media reversion.’
The study is interesting because they revealed the difficulty people have 
quitting Facebook because of addiction. Participants intended to quit, wanted 
to quit and believed they could quit (for 99 days), but many couldn’t make 
more than a few days.
The addictive aspect of social networking is associated with FOMO – fear of 
missing out. Everyone is on Facebook. They’re posting things, sharing news 
and content and talking to each other 24/7.
The network effect itself is addicting, according to Instagram software 
engineer Greg Hochmuth, ‘A network effect is the idea that any network 
becomes more valuable as more people connect to that network. The phone 
system is the best example of this phenomenon – you have to have a phone 
because everybody else has a phone.
In the world of social networking, Facebook benefits most from network 
effect. Facebook happened to be the top social network when social 
networking busted out as a mainstream activity. Now, everybody’s on 
Facebook because everybody’s on Facebook. And even people who don’t like 
the social network use it anyway, because that’s where their family, friends 
and colleagues are – and because of addiction.
The contribution of network effect to the addictive quality of web sites is 
accidental. But social sites are also addictive by design.
reversion Returning to something.
When you read the following extracts, or any or magazine articles, think about:
 
◼
what the writer is saying
 
◼
the aims of the writer
 
◼
how the writer achieves these aims
 
◼
how successful the writer has been.
Find some examples from the text as evidence for your points.
HINT
When you are thinking about structure, 
look at the paragraphs and try to say what 
the main idea is for each one. For example, 
in paragraph 1, it is that social media are 
addictive; in paragraph 2, it is that social 
media companies deliberately make 
their social networks addictive. Then ask 
yourself why some paragraphs are longer 
and where the writer brings in evidence. 
Finally, consider why the last paragraph is 
so short.
▲ Changing social habits are a fertile subject 
for writers
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
73
Before answering the following questions, make sure that you have 
taken in the key points from the text. Think about:
 
▶ the use of detail (e.g. names and facts)
 
▶ the impact of the headline
 
▶ the problems that are mentioned
 
▶ the style and layout of the text.
 
▶ How, according to Elgan, are social media addictive?
 
▶ How does he convey his own attitude to the problem?
 
▶ How does he structure his ideas in this extract?
ACTIVITY 10
▼  UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
‘ARE HUMANS DEFINITELY CAUSING GLOBAL WARMING?’ FROM THE 
GUARDIAN
Just as the world’s most respected scientific bodies have confirmed that 
world is getting hotter, they have also stated that there is strong evidence 
that humans are driving the warming. The 2005 joint statement from 
the national academies of Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, 
India, Italy, Japan, Russia, the UK and the US said:
“It is likely that most of the warming in recent decades can be 
attributed to human activities.”
Countless more recent statements and reports from the world’s 
leading scientific bodies have said the same thing. For example, a 2010 
summary of climate science by the Royal Society stated that:
“There is strong evidence that the warming of the Earth over the last 
half-century has been caused largely by human activity, such as the 
burning of fossil fuels and changes in land use, including agriculture and 
deforestation.”
The idea that humans could change the planet’s climate may be counter-
intuitive, but the basic science is well understood. Each year, human 
activity causes billions of tonnes of greenhouse gases to be released 
into the atmosphere. As scientists have known for decades, these gases 
capture heat that would otherwise escape to space – the equivalent of 
wrapping the planet in an invisible blanket.
Of course, the planet’s climate has always been in flux thanks to 
“natural” factors such as changes in solar or volcanic activity, or cycles 
relating the Earth’s orbit around the sun. According to the scientific 
literature, however, the warming recorded to date matches the pattern 
of warming we would expect from a build up of greenhouse gas in the 
atmosphere – not the warming we would expect from other possible 
causes.
▼   PREPARING FOR EXAM QUESTIONS
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING,  
INTERPRETATION
KEY POINT
Analyse the structure of a passage and 
see how it helps the purpose of the 
writing. Ask how the different parts fit 
together and relate to each other.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
74
REVIEWS
Now re-read this article, thinking about:
 
◼
the way that quotations are used
 
◼
how the writer tries to make their own views impossible to argue against
 
◼
the use of scientific and other technical language
 
◼
the kinds of evidence that the writer relies on to support the argument.
Reviews play an important part in the relationship between an artistic product 
and the public. A series of good reviews can help a book, video game, 
television series or CD album to succeed. A professional review performs 
several functions, such as:
 
◼
informing the reader about the product and its intended audience
 
◼
engaging the reader by the quality of the writing
 
◼
offering a series of critical judgements on aspects of the product
 
◼
making a recommendation as to whether the work is worth seeing, reading, 
hearing or buying.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS,  
INTERPRETATION, DECISION MAKING
Studying the two articles together, what do we learn about the writers’ 
views on their chosen topic, the evidence that they are quoting and the 
seriousness of the way in which they are responding to it? Explain how 
each of the writers uses language to communicate their views.  
(22 marks)
Before answering the question, look back at a few of the tables that you 
have used in previous activities, then make one of your own to help you. 
It might look like this: 
▼ VIEW/OPINION
▼ EVIDENCE
▼ TONE/MOOD
Social media 
Climate 
change
 
 
 
 
 
 
▼  COMPARATIVE QUESTION
ACTIVITY 11
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
75
immersive Involving.
epochal Helping to define a new era.
incandescent Filled with light from within.
▼   FROM A REVIEW OF STAR WARS: EPISODE VII BY MARK 
KERMODE IN THE GUARDIAN
The action takes place some years after the events of Return of the Jedi, 
and involves scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley) teaming up with renegade ‘First 
Order’ Stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega) and globular droid BB-8. The 
opening scroll sets up an ongoing battle between the forces of good and 
evil and lays the groundwork for a quasi-mythical quest that will reunite 
friends old and new, and allow a grizzled Harrison Ford to deliver the line: 
‘Chewie, we’re home…’
That sense of coming home runs throughout The Force Awakens, director 
JJ Abrams taking the series back to its roots while giving it a rocket-
fuelled, 21st-century twist. …The film feels very physical, scenes of 
dog-fighting TIE fighters and a relaunched Millennium Falcon crashing 
through trees possessing the kind of heft so sorely lacking from George 
Lucas’s over-digitised prequels. The battle scenes are breathtakingly 
immersive…but also impressively joyous – the sight of a fleet of X-wings 
hurtling toward us over watery terrain brought a lump to my throat and a 
tear to my eye – just one of several occasions when I found myself welling 
up with unexpected emotion…
Having co-written the series’s previous high-water mark, The Empire 
Strikes Back, Lawrence Kasdan here shares credits with Abrams and 
Michael Arndt on a screenplay … which subtly realigns its gender 
dynamics with Rey’s proudly punchy, post-Hunger Games heroine. The 
spectre of Vader may live on in Adam Driver’s Kylo Ren, but it’s Rey 
in whom the film’s true force resides, likeable newcomer Daisy Ridley 
carrying the heavily-mantled weight of the new series with aplomb. 
Plaudits, too, to John Boyega, who brings credibility and humour to the 
almost accidentally heroic role of Finn…
What’s most striking about Star Wars: The Force Awakens is the fact that 
it has real heart and soul… Abrams breathes new life into Lucas’s epochal 
creations in a manner that deftly looks back to the future. And it’s a future 
that works. Watching the film in a packed auditorium with an audience 
almost incandescent with expectation, I found myself listening to a 
chorus of spontaneous gasps, cheers, laughs, whoops and even occasional 
cries of anguish.
What’s really surprising is that many of them were coming from me.
KEY POINT
In order to be trusted by readers, 
reviews need to strike a balance 
between being too positive and being 
overly critical.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
76
Reference books and websites are designed to be consulted, not read all the 
way through. They usually consist of a large number of articles, sometimes 
on a great variety of topics. Some reference books offer an overview of all 
knowledge, such as the famous Encyclopaedia Britannica. Other reference 
books have a much more specialised range – there are thousands of reference 
books covering every academic discipline and field of knowledge.
Read the following extracts from Encyclopaedia Britannica, considering how 
the writing style differs from the other types of non-fiction writing that you have 
encountered so far.
REFERENCE BOOKS AND WEBSITES
▼   ‘ACQUISITION AND RECORDING OF INFORMATION IN 
DIGITAL FORM’, FROM ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA
The versatility of modern information systems stems from their ability to 
represent information electronically as digital signals and to manipulate it 
automatically at exceedingly high speeds. Information is stored in binary 
devices, which are the basic components of digital technology. Because these 
devices exist only in one of two states, information is represented in them 
either as the absence or the presence of energy (electric pulse). The two states 
of binary devices are conveniently designated by the binary digits, or bits, 
zero (0) and one (1).
Copy and complete the following table, finding examples of language 
used in the review that correspond with the categories in the first 
column. Then, using your examples, answer the questions.
▼  POSITIVE COMMENTS 
ABOUT…
▼  EXAMPLES FROM THE TEXT
the director/screenplay
the audience reaction
the acting
 
▶ Explain two aspects of the film that the writer finds engaging.
 
▶ How does the writer build up or communicate his positive feelings 
about the film?
ACTIVITY 12
▼  LANGUAGE USED IN REVIEWS
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
77
▼   ‘RAP’, FROM ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA
Rap, a musical style in which rhythmic and/or rhyming speech is chanted 
(‘rapped’) to musical accompaniment. This backing music, which can include 
digital sampling (music and sounds extracted from other recordings), is also 
called hip-hop, the name used to refer to a broader cultural movement that 
includes rap, deejaying (turntable manipulation), graffiti painting, and break 
dancing. Rap, which originated in African American communities in New 
York City, came to national prominence with the Sugar Hill Gang’s ‘Rapper’s 
Delight’ (1979). Rap’s early stars included Grandmaster Flash and the 
Furious Five, Run-D.M.C., LL Cool J, Public Enemy (who espoused a radical 
political message), and the Beastie Boys. The late 1980s saw the advent of 
‘gangsta rap,’ with lyrics that were often misogynistic or that glamorized 
violence and drug dealing. Later stars include Diddy, Snoop Dogg, Jay-Z, 
OutKast, Eminem, Kanye West, and Lil Wayne.
Characteristics of this kind of reference writing include those listed in 
the first column of the table below. Copy and complete the table and 
find another feature of your own.
▼  FEATURES
▼  EXAMPLES
▼  COMMENT ON 
EFFECT
A large amount of factual 
information 
Clusters of words from 
a specialised branch of 
knowledge
A lack of emotive 
vocabulary 
Most sentences are 
complete statements  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACTIVITY 13
▼  CHARACTERISTICS OF REFERENCE WRITING
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
KEY POINT
Some Reference works can be 
consulted by those with no subject 
knowledge at all. Others can be pitched 
at a higher level.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
78
▼   DARREN’S ACCOUNT
This has nothing to do with my friends. They didn’t even realise what had 
happened until after I hit him. I think they were laughing at a joke Jack had 
made. I did punch him, but that was because he told me I was going to be late 
with this smirk on his face like he was going to tell the teacher. I have never 
really seen him before and I thought he was trying to show me up in front of 
my friends.
▼   GREG’S ACCOUNT
It was awful. He hit me hard in the face and all his friends laughed at me 
when I started to cry. I was just walking past and was trying to be helpful by 
pointing out that the bell had gone. They always laugh at me in the corridor 
and I thought if I tried to help they would like me more. I don’t understand 
what is going on.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
identify the writer’s  
perspective
 
◼
understand how a writer 
communicates their 
perspective to a reader
A writer’s perspective is their point of view, or the angle from which 
they see the subject matter. Even the most purely informative 
articles, which show no personal angle at all, can be said to have a 
point of view, even if that point of view is objective or unbiased.
IDENTIFYING THE WRITER’S PERSPECTIVE
Many articles or pieces of writing that claim to be objective are not always 
unbiased, because everyone brings a personal, societal or national bias to bear 
on what they write. An article written for an encyclopaedia in the United States 
of America will be written from an American perspective, which means that the 
article may be different to one written in China, even though it is apparently 
unbiased. If the subject of the writing is politics, history or culture, national 
perspectives will often be very different. For example, in the travel writing extract 
on page 68, Stanley Stewart writes from the perspective of a curious British 
traveller, not from that of a native Mongolian. This fact means that his account of 
the wedding is entirely different from that of a native Mongolian.
There are many different types of perspective. The writer’s origin in a particular 
community or ethnic group may give them a particular perspective. Having 
a certain job or occupation might also influence their perspective – we could 
say they write from the perspective of an economist, a student, a singer, and 
so on. Martin Luther King’s famous speech, ‘I have a dream...’ is written from 
the point of view of a black American minister who has become the voice of a 
whole people.
In comparison, one of the commonest reasons for difference in perspective 
is the fact that people interact with others whom they do not necessarily 
understand. This may not be because of what they do or where they come 
from, but simply because people cannot know exactly what is going on in 
another person’s thoughts. This is shown by the following accounts of the 
same event.
DIFFERENCES IN PERSPECTIVE
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
79
ACTIVITY 1
▼   THINKING ABOUT PERSPECTIVE
Neither Greg’s nor Darren’s account of the same incident is false, but the 
writer of each version of events has a different perspective.
1 Describe what happened in the corridor.
2 What might have influenced the two boys to view the events in such 
different ways? Write down your ideas.
3 Greg’s perspective is that he has been bullied by this group for a long 
time. Write a sentence explaining Darren’s perspective is on Greg. Why 
is it important to have heard Darren’s perspective?
Another way of thinking about perspectives is to think of the writer in relation 
to two or more groups of people with different attitudes – one group which 
shares their views and another group, or other groups, which do not share 
these views. Ask yourself which groups would agree with a particular idea 
or argument and which would disagree. For example, one group might be 
more conservative (resistant to change), while another group might be more 
progressive (looking for positive change). Another common opposition is 
that between the authoritarian or restrictive and the liberal or tolerant. Often, 
the older generation is seen as being authoritarian and young people are 
considered to be more liberal.
KEY POINT
Attitude affects language. When you re-
read the extracts, think about how the 
writer uses language to communicate 
certain things to us and what this 
reveals about the writer’s purpose and 
personality.
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ANALYSIS, 
CREATIVITY
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, INNOVATION, 
EMPATHY
DIFFERENT ATTITUDES
Think of other ways in which people can be divided into groups whose 
attitudes are often different from each other.
Are these issues strictly defined so a person can only be in one group 
or the other? Or are some of them more complicated so that there is 
some overlap between them and some people can be placed more in 
between the groups?
▼  DIFFERING ATTITUDES
ACTIVITY 2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
80
Read the following extracts. Identify the writer’s purpose, making a note 
of the language choice and other writing techniques that allow you to 
identify the purpose. Then copy and complete the table, re-reading the 
extracts to find more examples to back up your ideas.
EXTRACT A
Kickz is a national programme, funded by the Premier League and 
Metropolitan Police, that uses football to work with young people 
at risk of offending in deprived areas. Arsenal FC delivers Kickz in 
Elthorne Park, getting kids off the street in the evening and playing 
football. The project has helped to transform the local area: there has 
been a reduction of 66% in youth crime within a one-mile radius of the 
project since it started. 
… The projects are targeted at neighbourhoods with high levels of 
antisocial behaviour and crime. … The sessions mostly involve football 
coaching, but they also provide coaching in other sports, such as 
basketball, and workshops on issues including drug awareness, healthy 
eating, volunteering, careers and weapons. 
ACTIVITY 3
▶
▼   IDENTIFYING A WRITER’S PURPOSE
the Premier League The highest league 
of English football.
Arsenal FC A Premier League football 
team based in London.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
▲ Horse racing is a popular pastime across the 
world, but is it cruel?
▲ Kickz is a youth football programme in the UK
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
81
HINT
If an adult decides to write from the point 
of view of a child, then he will imitate the 
language of a child. Writers can write in 
their own voice, or they can write in the 
voice of someone else.
Eagle A British children’s comic.
the Mekon A character in Eagle.
the Grand National A famous British 
horse race over large jumps.
EXTRACT B
... If you saw your neighbour whipping a dog, you’d be on the phone 
to the police immediately, right? Of course, anyone with a shred of 
decency condemns hurting animals. Yet, inexplicably, some still turn a 
blind eye to the cruelty to horses during the Grand National, in which 
riders are required to carry a whip. Nearly every year, racehorses sustain 
injuries. Many have paid with their lives.
EXTRACT C
Daddy says I have to eat to get well, even if it hurts. The nurse smiles 
at me when she brings the jam sandwiches. She smiles differently at the 
other nurses, and when she smiles at sister it is different again. I wish 
there were bubbles coming out of her head with words, like in Eagle… 
Thought bubbles would be a useful invention in real life. When you 
wake in the night there are strange slapping and scraping noises on the 
marble, and sometimes screams, but I close my eyes, and pretend I’m at 
home, and think of my presents, and imagine the Mekon in his bubble, 
and I do not cry, Daddy, I do not, I do not. 
▼  A
▼  B
▼  C
What attitude does the 
writer express?
What is the likely age 
group of the writer?
Why do you think the 
writer wrote the piece?
What other types of people 
might share the attitude of 
each writer?
What have you noticed 
about the language used in 
each extract?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▶ How is the language of these extracts influenced by the writer’s 
perspective. You could draw another table to help you answer this 
question, and remember to include examples.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
82
When you are reading, you should try to bear in mind the audience known 
as ‘the general reader’ or ‘the general public’. These phrases are used to 
indicate that all kinds of people may want to read a book about an expedition 
to the Himalayas or up the River Amazon, and that you do not need to have 
any particular interests to find the book interesting. However, it would also 
be reasonable to suggest that such books will appeal to readers interested in 
adventurous travel. This group will cross boundaries of age, gender, race, and 
so on, as it is defined by interest only, although it may include more of one 
section of the population than another.
 
▶ Do a survey of people you know and find out, for example, if outdoor 
adventure books such as Between a Rock and a Hard Place might appeal 
more to male readers than female, or more to younger readers than older 
ones. You could try this on other texts. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
identify the text’s audience  
and understand the purpose.
It is not always easy to appreciate a text unless you understand 
its purpose and who it was written for. Sometimes this is not 
difficult, such as when the reader is a member of the writer’s 
intended audience. If you were a child born in Ghana or Jamaica, 
then the stories of Anansi the spider would be intended for you 
and there would be no additional context to learn about. However, 
in other cases, you may need some background knowledge: for 
example, Martin Luther King’s speech, ‘I have a dream...’, does 
not mean all that it should if its reader is ignorant of the history 
and culture of the USA. Likewise, the poem, The Bright Lights of 
Sarajevo, means a great deal more to us if we know something 
about the Bosnian War of the 1990s. 
AUDIENCE AND PURPOSE
HINT
Writers do not only write from a particular 
perspective. They also write with a 
particular ‘view’ in front of them, which 
includes their purpose and audience, 
meaning that these three aspects are 
closely connected.
As you work through this book, you read a wide range of texts written for different audiences and for very 
different reasons. The following table will help you to compare some of the passages that you encountered 
between pages XX and XX. Copy and complete it as best you can.
▼  TEXT
▼  AUDIENCE
▼  PURPOSE
The Diary of a Young Girl 
Ellen MacArthur’s autobiography 
Mongolian Wedding 
Luther King’s ‘I have a dream...’ speech 
Herself; perhaps also for others. 
People interested in ocean yachting and 
racing or in tough sporting exploits.
 
 
To confide her thoughts with an 
imaginary friend.
 
 
 
ACTIVITY 1
▶
▶
▼  IDENTIFYING AUDIENCE AND PURPOSE
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
83
Get into the habit of thinking about audience, purpose and language use 
whenever you read a text. Think about the relationship between these three 
aspects of the text. This skill will help you in the exam as well as in everyday life.
A writer’s purpose has a good deal to do with their audience: a writer will 
never write for everyone. A writer’s choice of language is also affected by both. 
Suppose that you were writing a story about a crime for a seven-year-old child. 
You would choose appropriate language for the reader, considering their age 
or level of understanding and the subject matter. Your choices would be very 
different if you had to write a script for a stand-up comedian.
Now do a similar exercise on some of the passages in the Anthology. 
▼ TEXT
▼ AUDIENCE
▼ PURPOSE
The Bright Lights of Sarajevo 
 
‘Explorers or boys messing about’ 
 
Between a Rock and a Hard Place. 
 
Those interested in the Bosnian war; 
those interested in the poetry of Tony 
Harrison and similar-writers.
Readers of The Guardian; those 
interested in human interest tales of 
endurance and hardship.
To communicate something of the way 
people went on living during the siege 
of Sarajevo.
 
 
AUDIENCE, PURPOSE AND 
LANGUAGE
Copy and complete the following table with some of the ways in which language is affected by audience and 
purpose. Add more entries in the table. The more you think about these aspects of a text, the better you will 
understand them.
▼ TEXT
▼ AUDIENCE
▼ PURPOSE
▼ LANGUAGE
Luther King’s ‘I have a 
dream...’ speech
H is for Hawk (see pages 
XX–XX) 
A Passage to Africa (see 
pages XX–XX)
‘Young and dyslexic’ (see 
pages XX–XX)
Chinese Cinderella (see pages 
XX–XX)
The people at the rally for 
black civil rights.
Readers interested in hawks 
or birds; fans of  
non-fiction.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▶ Re-read the extract from The Diary of a Young Girl (page XXX–XXX) and answer the following question: In what 
ways is the language of this passage affected by its audience and purpose?
ACTIVITY 2
▼  CHOOSING LANGUAGE FOR AN AUDIENCE AND A PURPOSE
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING
KEY POINT
Audience is always relevant to a 
text. The language is affected by the 
audience and vice versa.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
84
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how writers use 
their expertise with language 
to create a range of varied 
effects.
Many writers think about their potential readers when they are 
writing. We have already looked at purpose and perspective, 
and now we are going to build on this by considering more of 
the effects that writers can achieve with their choice of words, 
phrases and sentences. Some of the examples in this section will 
be taken from the passages you have already looked at. 
LANGUAGE FOR DIFFERENT EFFECTS 
GETTING CLOSE TO THE READER
Some writers want to create a close relationship with their readers, while others 
do not. In autobiographies, writers may share very private thoughts and deal 
with difficult emotions. They can use chatty or colloquial speech if they feel that 
that is the best way to engage with their readers. Diaries can be good examples 
of this, whether their authors are writing only for themselves or for others.
EMOTIVE LANGUAGE
In A Passage to Africa, George Alagiah wants to shock the reader and to 
communicate the suffering that he sees in the villages that he visits. He wants 
us to see in our mind’s eye the things he writes about.
Of the writers that you have read so far, which other writers have used emotive 
language?
Read the following quotations, taken from passages in this book, then copy and complete the table.
▼ QUOTATION
▼ LANGUAGE
▼ PURPOSE 
▼ EFFECT
‘I was 19. My American roommate was shocked 
by me. She asked where I had learned to speak 
English so well, and was confused when I said 
that Nigeria happened to have English as its 
official language.’
Narrative, with 
some emotive 
adjectives. 
 
To show how 
people are 
prejudiced. 
 
We learn from this anecdote 
how ordinary American 
people know little about 
distant foreign cultures (in 
this case, Nigeria).
‘It was not a smile of greeting, it was not a smile 
of joy — how could it be? — but it was a smile 
nonetheless. It touched me in a way I could not 
explain. It moved me in a way that went beyond 
pity or revulsion.’
Emotive, focused on 
feelings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘The mattak or blubber of the whale is rich 
in necessary minerals and vitamins, and in a 
place where the climate prohibits the growth of 
vegetables or fruit, this rich source of vitamin C 
was the one reason that the Eskimos have never 
suffered from scurvy.’
Explanatory (or 
expository). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▼   THINKING ABOUT PURPOSE AND EFFECT
ACTIVITY 1 
▶
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
85
▼ QUOTATION
▼ LANGUAGE
▼ PURPOSE 
▼ EFFECT
‘The Royal Navy’s ice patrol ship, HMS 
Endurance, which was 180 miles away surveying 
uncharted waters, began steaming towards the 
scene and dispatched its two Lynx helicopters.’
Narrative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘The big problem with the education system 
then was that there was no compassion, no 
understanding and no humanity.’
Thoughts and 
opinions. 
 
 
 
 
‘Good God, my hand. The flaring agony throws 
me into a panic. I grimace and growl…’ 
Emotive, using 
sensational language 
and exclamations.
 
 
 
 
‘The hawk’s wings, barred and beating, the sharp 
fingers of her dark-tipped primaries cutting the 
air, her feathers raised.’
Vividly descriptive. 
 
 
 
 
 
Now think about this the other way around. What effect does the writer 
want to achieve with their choice of language? Copy and complete the 
following table, looking through passages in this book for examples of 
each aim.
▼ AIM
▼ LANGUAGE
▼ EXAMPLE
▼ EFFECT
To make the 
reader imagine 
something.
Vividly 
descriptive. 
A Passage to 
Africa, lines… 
We imagine the 
scene or person 
described.
To direct 
the reader’s 
emotions.
Emotive, using 
the language of 
the emotions.
 
 
 
 
To be friendly to 
the reader.
Chatty. 
 
 
 
To impress the 
reader with the 
writer’s style.
 
 
 
 
 
 
To amuse.  
Humourous, 
jokey, playful.
 
 
To inform. 
 
 
 
To argue.  
 
 
 
To create 
suspense. 
Short sentences 
with mini-
cliffhangers.
‘And then the 
trouble began.’ 
 
 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
KEY POINT
The skilled writer can create a wide 
range of effects on the reader because 
they have an excellent command of the 
language.
▲ A navy patrol ship
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
86
A lot of writing is concerned at least partly with creating patterns and certain 
effects within those patterns. 
LANGUAGE FOR PATTERN  
AND EFFECT
It is important that you can use the correct terminology when commenting on and describing language use. Copy 
and complete this table. 
▼ WRITER
▼ SUBJECT
▼ PHRASE
▼ TYPE OF LANGUAGE
▼ EFFECT 
Helen Macdonald 
 
 
A hawk 
 
 
‘A fallen angel. A 
griffon from the pages 
of an illuminated 
bestiary.’
Two metaphors with 
precise vocabulary 
 
The description is 
made more vivid and 
memorable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copy and complete the following table by finding examples of each technique and commenting on their effects.
▼ TECHNIQUE
▼ EXAMPLE
▼ EFFECT
H
Hyperbole or exaggeration
 
 
E
Emotive language
 
 
R
Register
 
 
C
Contrast
 
 
R
Repetition
 
 
A
Alliteration and assonance
 
 
S
Structure
 
 
H
Humour
 
 
F
Figurative language (e.g. similes)
 
 
A
Antithesis 
 
 
C
Contrast
 
 
T
Tripling
 
 
O
Onomatopoeia
 
 
R 
Rhetorical questions (and other 
rhetorical devices)
 
 
 
 
S
Short sentences or paragraphs
 
 
L 
Lists
 
 
▼   SIMPLE DESCRIPTIONS DESCRIBING THE AUTHOR’S CHOICE OF LANGUAGE 
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
87
Many students find it difficult to think of ways to describe the effects of 
language and tend to overuse words like ‘descriptive’ when it is not strictly 
accurate, or rely on vague phrases such as ‘draws the reader in’. Try using 
some of the following alternatives.
Alliteration and assonance 
Makes language more emphatic/more rhythmic/more 
memorable.
Onomatopoeia
Makes phrases more vivid and powerful.
Descriptive phrasing
Makes the reader imagine the scene.
Verbs of motion and action
Make the language more dynamic and energetic.
Wordplay, exaggeration
Makes writing light-hearted, amusing.
Abstract nouns 
Make writing more intellectual or more to do with 
ideas.
Repetition
Emphasises a particular point or word.
A mixture of techniques
Makes language varied; lively, etc.
Other techniques include:
 
◼
anaphora
 
◼
balanced phrases
 
◼
allusions
 
◼
juxtaposition.
Look these up in a dictionary and see if you can find examples in the texts in 
this book.
DESCRIPTORS FOR LANGUAGE
There are two obvious ways of classifying sentence types by their function and 
by their grammatical complexity.
SENTENCE FUNCTION
Statements
Dominate informative writing and narrative in stories.
Questions 
 
Common in dialogue and in explorative articles. They can be used 
in speeches to engage the audience, particularly in the form of 
rhetorical questions.
Exclamations 
Mainly found in dialogue, but also in first person accounts of 
adventures, real life experiences and so on.
Commands 
Usually found in dialogue and instructions. They use the imperative 
form of the verb (for example, ‘Come on, let’s move).’
Wishes 
Expressions of thoughts and feelings often found in diaries, letters 
and dialogue (for example, ‘If only I hadn’t done that.’).
USING SENTENCE TYPES FOR 
EFFECT
HINT
Help yourself to learn these by thinking of 
and writing an example of each one.
KEY POINT
Learning the technical terms for 
descriptive effects will allow you to 
express yourself more precisely in your 
analysis of writing.
SENTENCE COMPLEXITY
Simple sentences
Consist of only one main clause.
Compound sentences
Two or more main clauses joined by ‘and’, ‘but’, ‘so’ or ‘or’.
Complex sentences
Contain at least one subordinate clause.
Incomplete sentences 
Do not have a complete main clause or used frequently in 
conversation and in writing for effect or emphasis or in one-
word sentences such as, ‘He stopped. Silence.’).
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
88
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
distinguish between these 
three types of writing
 
◼
distinguish between facts from 
opinions.
Often, the purpose of a text is to inform its audience about 
something. You have come across several texts the purpose of 
which is to inform us about something, using a mixture of three 
main types of writing: description, reporting or narrative, and 
explanation. All of these are forms of factual writing.
FACT, OPINION AND EXPERT ADVICE
Look through this book to find examples of these different types of 
writing, then copy and complete the following table.
▼ TYPE
▼ QUOTATION FROM TEXT
▼ PAGE 
Description
 
 
Reporting or 
narrative
  
 
Explanation
 
 
ACTIVITY 1
▶
▼  TYPES OF FACTUAL WRITING
As we have already seen, non-fiction texts often include people’s opinions and 
beliefs, even if they may not be factually true. This includes:
 
◼
opinions as statements of belief, such as, ‘I think football is the best sport 
in the world’ 
 
◼
opinions stated as fact.
Be careful when someone states an opinion or belief as though it is a fact. 
For example, the second statement about football has the form of a factual 
statement, but it is still really just a statement of belief about football. People 
often make statements of belief as though they are facts, so you should always 
ask questions of what you read and analyse what people write as facts when 
they may in fact be statements of belief.
For example, advertisers may state opinion as fact. Washing products may be 
advertised as making clothes whiter than other brands of washing detergent, 
but it is unlikely that these statements can be said to be ‘facts’.
In comparison, an argument is an opinion or set of opinions backed up by 
reasons and evidence. It would be easy to express an opinion that you are the 
President of the United States, but hard to construct an argument that proves 
that you are the President of the United States.
 
▶ Over a day or two, write down a collection of opinions stated as facts 
that you hear or see in the media, among your friends and family or in 
advertisements.
FACTS AND OPINION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS
▲ The best sport in the world?
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
89
Non-fiction texts can contain examples of advice. For example, a book review 
may advise you to read or not to read a particular book. An online article 
may advise you how to save money, how to prepare for a hot summer, or 
recommend places to visit. An ‘agony aunt’ in a magazine could suggest ways 
of coping with problems in a personal relationship.
Generally speaking, we appreciate advice more if it comes from someone who 
knows what they are talking about: an expert. Advice is linked to persuasive 
writing, since it tries to influence the person being advised. 
Read the following extracts, then decide whether they are fact, opinion, 
argument, or opinion presented as fact.
‘It’s a fact that boys are stronger than girls.’
 
‘Everyone knows that Britain would be better off outside the 
European Union. I don’t know anyone who thinks otherwise.’
 
‘We should encourage immigration into this country for three 
reasons: it supplies us with more skills, it helps us to understand 
other cultures and it is morally a good thing to do.’
 
 
‘The USA is more powerful in military terms than Russia.’
 
‘I think that all religions are equally valid: I don’t know about all of 
them, but they all have their good points and their less good points.’
ACTIVITY 2
EXPERT ADVICE
Dear Billy,
Your letter shows you really want to give up smoking and that is the first 
step to making it happen. You won’t be alone; all the coolest people are 
giving it up now.
Make no mistake, it is difficult to stop – but you can do it. Lots of people 
have managed to kick the habit.
Here’s how you start.
Make a plan.
1. Set a date for your last cigarette and stick to it!
2. Try and get some support from a friend or relative. It always helps to talk 
to someone about problems – a problem shared is a problem halved!
3. Keep busy to help take your mind off ciggies. Perhaps take up a new 
hobby or sport, like cycling.
4. Try to change your routine, and avoid the shops where you usually buy 
cigarettes.
5. Save up the money that you normally spend on cigarettes and buy 
something special for yourself with it.
Good luck – I hope it all goes well. Quitting smoking will make you feel a lot 
better and, with the exercise from your cycling, you should be able to wave 
stress goodbye!
All the best,
Nadiya
▼  FACT, OPINION OR ARGUMENT?
coolest The expert makes the advice 
seem more attractive by associating the 
recommended course of action with ‘the 
coolest’ people.
you can do it The tone is encouraging.
set... stick... try... keep These are 
imperatives: they are all commands. What 
effect does this have?
get some support advice often suggests 
how to get more support and advice.
avoid the shops Advice is often both 
positive and negative (‘dos and don’ts’); for 
example, ‘avoid the shops’ is a ‘don’t’.
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING
KEY POINT
You need to know how to recognise 
writing that states facts and then 
question whether the use of the factual 
form is justified.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
90
Most of us respond to a skilfully structured piece of writing without understanding 
exactly why. When analysing structure, then, we have to understand the purpose 
of a passage, which can only be done by careful reading. The next task is see the 
structure within it that helps put the purpose into effect. We can then write about:
 
◼
the writer’s intention in the text 
 
◼
the structure that the writer has used to achieve that intention
 
◼
the effects of each part of the structure.
Many students find it difficult to analyse structure in writing, but the following 
techniques should help you.
 
◼
Think in terms of the beginning, middle and end of the text or extract. How 
are they different from each other. 
 
◼
Look at the paragraphs and identify the content of each one. Then 
consider what the writer is doing with that content and why he or she 
chose to put the content in that order.
 
◼
Look at the way in which the writer uses the basic types of writing you find 
in non-fiction:
 
>
description (of the setting or the appearance of people and objects)
 
>
narrative (what happened or is happening)
 
>
dialogue or speech (including talking to one self)
 
>
thoughts and feelings (when not in direct speech)
 
>
background information, facts, or explanation.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand what structure in 
writing is and how you can 
write about it.
What do you understand is meant by the word, ‘structure’? Try 
writing down a short definition of ‘structure’ in relation to a 
piece of writing. You could use one of the extracts in this book or 
another text that you know.
THE STRUCTURE OF A TEXT
▶
HINT
Look also at the relative sizes of the 
paragraphs. If they vary quite noticeably 
then there is probably a good reason 
for it (a short paragraph might be an 
effective opening or conclusion, or used for 
emphasis elsewhere)
Read the following passage, using the techniques you have just learned to help you think about the structure of 
the passage.
▼  IDENTIFYING A PASSAGE’S STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY 1
I was set down from the carrier’s cart at the age of three; and there with a sense of bewilderment and terror my life 
in the village began. 
The June grass, amongst which I stood, was taller than I was, and I wept. I had never been so close to grass before. It 
towered above me and all around me, each blade tattooed with tiger-skins of sunlight. It was knife-edged, dark, and 
a wicked green, thick as a forest and alive with grasshoppers that chirped and chattered and leapt through the air 
like monkeys.
I was lost and didn’t know where to move. A tropic heat oozed up from the ground, rank with sharp odours of roots 
and nettles. Snow-clouds of elder-blossom banked in the sky, showering upon me the fumes and flakes of their sweet 
and giddy suffocation. High overhead ran frenzied larks, screaming, as though the sky were tearing apart. 
▼  CIDER WITH ROSIE BY LAURIE LEE
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION, CREATIVITY
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
91
HINT
Try to bring together analytical and 
writing skills – think about how and why 
you would structure a piece of your own 
writing. 
KEY POINT
When people talk about the structure of 
a piece, they are not normally referring 
to sentence structure, which is usually 
regarded as a linguistic feature. 
However, there are two points worth 
bearing in mind.
1. You might notice that a piece 
ends or begins with a very short 
sentence, in which case the writer 
is using sentence structure as 
a deliberate part of the larger 
structure.
2. Sentence structure is still an 
important point to consider. If 
you can make a good point about 
sentence structure, then you should 
include it in your answer.
It can also be useful to consider the types of writing that the writer is using, 
such as description, narrative and so on. For example, a passage with some 
description of the setting, or a character, followed by some narrative in which 
something happens. As soon as you notice these different types of writing, 
you should be able to say something about why they are there in the passage. 
Many students do not consciously register when a writer is using dialogue or 
telling us a character’s thoughts, so if you do notice these things, you will give 
yourself an immediate advantage.
Copy and complete the following table, using the analysis you have just made, 
to list four examples of different types of writing used by Lee in the passage 
that you have just read.
▼  TYPE OR 
FUNCTION
▼ QUOTATION
▼ EFFECT (OR PURPOSE)
Description 
 
 
Narrative 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the first time in my life I was out of the sight of humans. For the first time in my life I was alone in a world 
whose behaviour I could neither predict nor fathom: a world of birds that squealed, of plants that stank, of insects 
that sprang about without warning. I was lost and I did not expect to be found again. I put back my head and 
howled, and the sun hit me smartly on the face, like a bully. 
 
▶ Sum up, in three sentences, the beginning, middle and end of the extract. Use the third person (he). How is the 
first paragraph different from the others? Can you see a reason for this? 
 
▶ Look again at the four paragraphs from Cider with Rosie and write a line about the purpose or effect of each 
paragraph. Then explain why you think Lee chose to put the content in that order. 
 
▶ How should I use terminology and identify more structural features?
 
▶ What do you think is the effect of structuring the passage in these four paragraphs? Choose the comment that 
you think is most useful and accurate from the following list and fill in the blanks.
 
◼
It enables the writer to develop and __________ the narrator’s feelings of __________ and __________ in 
slightly different ways _______.
 
◼
It arranges the description of the setting and the narrator’s __________ in a way that ______________ the 
feeling to ______________.
 
◼
It gives the description a sense of ______________ and ______________.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
92
Question 1 is a comprehension question to check your understanding of the 
unseen text. It will ask you to find information from the text and to give two 
examples of this. You only need to provide two examples, there are no extra 
marks for providing more.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
Understand how to tackle 
questions 1–3 on an unseen 
text.
The questions in Paper 1 Section A will be based on two 
passages: one from the Non-fiction texts Anthology, with which 
you will be familiar, and another passage that you will not have 
seen before. Understanding and analysing this unseen text is 
critical to your success in this part of the exam.
UNSEEN TEXTS
QUESTION 1
▶
READING UNSEEN TEXTS
The first thing to do when faced with an unseen text is to read it and start 
thinking about what it is saying. Try not to be scared by the fact that you have 
never seen it before. By using the skills that you have learned by studying 
other texts, you should have all the tools you need to understand it and 
analyse it effectively.
When you have read the text, use these questions to help you think about what 
you have read:
 
◼
What sort of text is it?
 
◼
What is the text about?
 
◼
Who is the intended audience for the text?
 
◼
Is the writer trying to make a particular point?
 
◼
What literary techniques does the writer use?
 
◼
What effects do these techniques have?
 
◼
How does the text make you feel personally?
Simply by answering these questions, you will find that you are able to say 
a lot about the unseen text. You should spend a short time reading the text 
and getting a good understanding of it. This will then allow you to focus on 
answering the specifics in the exam questions.
For this section, we will use the passage from Cider with Rosie on pages 
90–91 as the unseen text. 
Read the passage from Cider with Rosie. Spend five minutes quickly 
answering the questions from the list above. Discuss your answers with 
a partner. 
▼  UNDERSTANDING THE UNSEEN TEXT
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
1 From lines 3–9, select two words or phrases that describe the setting. 
 
(2 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
93
Question 3 asks you to describe something that is happening in the text. You 
need to have an understanding of what the text is about and what the writer is 
saying. You should look to support your answer with short quotations from the 
text as evidence to back up your point. P–E–E is a good model to use when 
answering this question.
Question 2 concentrates on the writer’s thoughts and feelings. You need to 
think about how you know what the writer is feeling – is this information given 
explicitly or is it implicit? You should also think about how you know this and 
the language that the writer uses in order to convey what they are thinking and 
how they feel.
QUESTION 2
3 From lines 1–15, describe the writer’s first impressions of the village.
You may support your points with brief quotations.
 
(5 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
Thinking about the passage from Cider with Rosie, list all of the things 
that the author says about how he feels. In the exam you will be asked 
to use your own words to explain this, so write a list of synonyms for the 
words the author uses.
▼  THOUGHTS AND FEELINGS
ACTIVITY 2 
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, INNOVATION
2 Look again at lines 7–15.
In your own words, explain what the writer’s thoughts and feelings are of 
finding himself in a strange new place.
 
(4 marks)
QUESTION 3
Looking at the passage from Cider with Rosie, complete the table below 
to list what the writer thinks about the village. Give examples from the 
text to support your point and explain how this is effective. 
▼ FEELING
▼ QUOTATION
▼ EXPLANATION
He feels overwhelmed 
by the experience. 
 
 
“I put my head back 
and howled” 
 
 
This is an instinctive 
primal reaction to the 
unknown situation and 
he resorts to a basic 
impulse to cry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▼  USING QUOTATIONS
ACTIVITY 3 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
94
▼   THE HUNGRY CYCLIST BY TOM KEVILL-DAVIES
Sheltering from torrential 
rain in a dirty roadside 
hamlet just north of Quito, 
I surveyed my options for 
dinner. A few limp limbed 
chickens did another turn in 
their mechanical rotisserie; a 
plate of worn-out humitas, 
a sweet tamale, waited for 
that unlucky customer to 
save them from another night 
under the heat lamp; a bored teenager with too much hair-gel prodded 
and probed a row of disturbingly red hotdog sausages. Not at all 
tempted by the usual suspects that made up the options in these small 
Ecuadorian towns, I began to wonder if my hunger could hold out 
until breakfast.
But hello! What’s this?
At the end of the street, sheltering from the rain under a tatty 
umbrella, an old lady was fanning frantically at the coals of her small 
grill. I took a seat on the cold steps of the grocery store from which 
she served, and watched her work while a steady stream of customers 
pulled in from the rain.
I ordered a bowl of grilled chicken gizzards, served on a heap of 
sweet corn and fried kernels of salted maize and it was immediately 
clear that she knew what she was doing. As the evening passed by the 
buses, trucks and pick-ups splashed through the rain filled potholes 
of the main street. We didn’t talk much, but that seemed normal here 
in Ecuador, but from what little was said, and my persistent interest 
in the secret of her giblets, it was obvious we enjoyed a common love 
of food, and it wasn’t long before our conversation turned to Cuy. I 
expressed my dismay at having only found this traditional dish strung 
up like freshly run over roadkill in front of the tourist restaurants 
en route from Otavalo to Quito, and my keenness to see how these 
rodents were prepared at home. I was invited for lunch the next day.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
prepare for reading non-fiction 
exam-style questions.
The passages you will be given for Paper 1 are likely to be 
between 800 and 1400 words long, or at least 60 lines in length. 
The following example is shorter than this, but you can use it to 
practise your reading, planning and writing skills in preparation 
for the exam. Read the unseen passage and answer the questions 
that follow. One of the questions also requires you to consider 
Beyond the Sky and Earth from the Anthology. Aim to complete all 
five questions from Section A in 90 minutes.
PUTTING IT INTO PRACTICE
▶
humitas A sweet, steamed fresh corn cake, 
traditional in the Ande, similar to the Mexican 
tamale. What is the effect of using these 
South American words?
red Why are they ‘disturbingly red’? What is 
the effect?
usual suspects What is the tone here? 
Where does this phrase come from?
gizzards Stomach parts.
maize Crop from which sweetcorn grows.
like freshly run over roadkill An 
unusual simile – what is the effect?
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
10
 
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
30 
▶
▲ A street scene in Quito, Ecuador
KEY POINT
To ensure the most efficient use of 
time, a direct approach to answering 
the question is usually best, rather than 
spending a long time getting to your 
main points.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
NON-FICTION TEXTS
95
Cuy, conejillo de Indias – Indian rabbits, or guinea pigs as we know 
them in the pet shop – have been an important food source in Peru 
and Ecuador since pre-Inca times. Fifteen centuries later, they still 
remain an Andean delicacy, and on average Peruvians and Ecuadorians 
gobble down twenty-two million of these tasty rodents every year. 
Most Andean households keep cuy at home in the same way that we 
might keep chickens. Considered a speciality, they are mostly saved 
for special occasions. Rather like a bottle of champagne or perhaps 
a box of Ferrero Rocher, a mating pair of guinea pigs are a typical 
house warming gift for a newlywed couple. Playing an integral role in 
Andean religious and ceremonial practices, as well as providing dinner, 
cuy are also used in the traditional medicine of the region. A live cuy is 
rubbed over the body of someone sick. The cuy’s squeaking indicates 
the diseased area of the human patient. 
The following questions are based on Text One: The Hungry Cyclist and 
Text Two: Beyond the Sky and Earth: A Journey into Bhutan.
Text One: The Hungry Cyclist
1 From lines 28–41, select two words or phrases that describe the uses of 
Cuy. 
 
(2 marks)
2 Look again at lines 1–9.
In your own words, explain what the writer’s thoughts and feelings are 
before he finds the lady who was grilling chicken.
 
(4 marks)
3 From lines 16–27, describe the writer’s impressions of Ecuadorian cuisine. 
You may support your points with brief quotations.
 
(5 marks)
Remind yourself of the passage from Beyond the Sky and Earth  
(pages XX–XX).
4 How does the writer create an interesting and engaging atmosphere and 
sense of place?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, 
including brief quotations.
 
(12 marks)
Question 5 is based on both The Hungry Cyclist and Beyond the Sky and 
Earth.
5 Compare how the writers present their ideas and perspectives about their 
experiences.
Support your answer with detailed examples from both texts, including brief 
quotations.
 
(22 marks)
conejillo de Indias What is the effect of 
using this Spanish phrase?
delicacy A much-prized dish.
Ferrero Rocher Italian chocolates 
wrapped in gold foil.
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
45
HINT
For Question 3, rather than simply 
repeating the question, it might be better 
to find a way straight into the answer, such 
as ‘At first the writer is not at all impressed 
with what he finds…’
HINT
Make sure that you know all of the 
Anthology texts well as only one will 
appear in this exam. When answering, it is 
always better to explain a few techniques 
in detail rather than to list points without 
explaining them properly.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING, INTERPRETATION
HINT
Use connectives that help you make 
comparisons. For example, ‘Both travellers 
are exploring new places but whereas 
Zeppa seems to be interested mainly in 
the people of Bhutan, Kevill-Davies is 
concentrating here on the food of Ecuador.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS,  
INTERPRETATION, DECISION 
MAKING
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
96
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie was born the fifth of six children in 
the town of Nsukka in south-eastern Nigeria, where the University 
of Nigeria is situated. Her father was a professor of statistics at 
the university and her mother was the university’s first female 
registrar. 
Adichie studied medicine and pharmacy at the University of 
Nigeria for a year and a half. Then she left Nigeria to study 
communications and political science in the USA. Now she 
divides her time between Nigeria, where she teaches writing 
workshops, and the United States. 
She has published poetry and fiction and her novels have 
won several awards. For example, her first novel, Purple 
Hibiscus (2003), was awarded the Commonwealth Writers’ 
Prize for Best First Book (2005). Adichie says of feminism and 
writing, ‘I think of myself as a storyteller, but I would not mind at 
all if someone were to think of me as a feminist writer... I’m very 
feminist in the way I look at the world, and that world view must 
somehow be part of my work.’ 
‘THE DANGER OF A SINGLE STORY’ 
CHIMAMANDA NGOZI ADICHIE
▶
BEFORE YOU START READING 
1 Think of an ethnic group about which you have a few ideas but about 
which you know very few actual facts. Write down your honest views of 
the stereotype of that ethnic group.
2 Find out as much about this group as you can. Write down some new 
things that surprise you.
3 Do you think others see you in a stereotyped way? Write down some of 
the stereotypes they might have.
▼   FROM ‘THE DANGER OF A SINGLE STORY’, BY 
CHIMAMANDA NGOZI ADICHIE
Adichie, a successful novelist, delivered this speech at a TED 
conference. She speaks about the power of storytelling and the 
danger of a single view. 
I’m a storyteller. And I would like to tell you a few personal stories 
about what I like to call ‘the danger of the single story.’ I grew up on 
a university campus in eastern Nigeria. My mother says that I started 
reading at the age of two, although I think four is probably close to 
the truth. So I was an early reader, and what I read were British and 
American children’s books.
 
 
 
5 
 
 
TED A nonprofit organisation devoted to 
spreading ideas, usually in the form of short, 
powerful talks (18 minutes or less); TED 
stands for Technology, Entertainment and 
Design.
campus The complex of buildings that 
make up a university.
▶
GENERAL VOCABULARY
registrar keeping official records of the 
students
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
97
I was also an early writer, and when I began to write, at about the 
age of seven, stories in pencil with crayon illustrations that my poor 
mother was obligated to read, I wrote exactly the kinds of stories I 
was reading: all my characters were white and blue-eyed, they played 
in the snow, they ate apples, and they talked a lot about the weather, 
how lovely it was that the sun had come out.
Now, this despite the fact that I lived in Nigeria. I had never been 
outside Nigeria. We didn’t have snow, we ate mangoes, and we never 
talked about the weather, because there was no need to. …
What this demonstrates, I think, is how impressionable and vulnerable 
we are in the face of a story, particularly as children. Because all I 
had read were books in which characters were foreign, I had become 
convinced that books by their very nature had to have foreigners in 
them and had to be about things with which I could not personally 
identify. Now, things changed when I discovered African books. There 
weren’t many of them available, and they weren’t quite as easy to find 
as the foreign books.
But because of writers like Chinua Achebe and Camara Laye, I went 
through a mental shift in my perception of literature. I realized that 
people like me, girls with skin the colour of chocolate, whose kinky 
hair could not form ponytails, could also exist in literature. I started to 
write about things I recognised.
Now, I loved those American and British books I read. They stirred my 
imagination. They opened up new worlds for me. But the unintended 
consequence was that I did not know that people like me could exist 
in literature. So what the discovery of African writers did for me was 
this: it saved me from having a single story of what books are.
I come from a conventional, middle-class Nigerian family. My father 
was a professor. My mother was an administrator. And so we had, 
as was the norm, live-in domestic help, who would often come from 
nearby rural villages. So, the year I turned eight, we got a new house 
boy. His name was Fide. The only thing my mother told us about him 
was that his family was very poor. My mother sent yams and rice, and 
our old clothes, to his family. And when I didn’t finish my dinner, my 
mother would say, ‘Finish your food! Don’t you know? People like 
Fide’s family have nothing.’ So I felt enormous pity for Fide’s family.
Then one Saturday, we went to his village to visit, and his mother 
showed us a beautifully patterned basket made of dyed raffia that 
his brother had made. I was startled. It had not occurred to me that 
anybody in his family could actually make something. All I had heard 
about them was how poor they were, so that it had become impossible 
for me to see them as anything else but poor. Their poverty was my 
single story of them.
Years later, I thought about this when I left Nigeria to go to university 
in the United States. I was 19. My American roommate was shocked 
by me. She asked where I had learned to speak English so well, and 
was confused when I said that Nigeria happened to have English as 
its official language. She asked if she could listen to what she called 
my ‘tribal music’, and was consequently very disappointed when I 
produced my tape of Mariah Carey.
10 
 
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
45
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
55 
 
 
 
impressionable Easily influenced.
Chinua Achebe and Camara Laye 
Prominent and pioneering Nigerian authors 
in the second half of the 20th century.
raffia Dry palm leaves.
Mariah Carey Popular American singer.
▶
▲ Nigerian poet and novelist Chimamanda 
Ngozi Adichie
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
98
She assumed that I did not know how to use a stove.
What struck me was this: she had felt sorry for me even before she 
saw me. Her default position toward me, as an African, was a kind 
of patronising, well-meaning pity. My roommate had a single story of 
Africa: a single story of catastrophe. In this single story, there was no 
possibility of Africans being similar to her in any way, no possibility 
of feelings more complex than pity, no possibility of a connection as 
human equals. …
So, after I had spent some years in the U.S. as an African, I began to 
understand my roommate’s response to me. If I had not grown up in 
Nigeria, and if all I knew about Africa were from popular images, 
I too would think that Africa was a place of beautiful landscapes, 
beautiful animals, and incomprehensible people, fighting senseless 
wars, dying of poverty and AIDS, unable to speak for themselves and 
waiting to be saved by a kind, white foreigner. I would see Africans in 
the same way that I, as a child, had seen Fide’s family. …
But I must quickly add that I too am just as guilty in the question 
of the single story. A few years ago, I visited Mexico from the U.S. 
The political climate in the U.S. at the time was tense, and there 
were debates going on about immigration. And, as often happens in 
America, immigration became synonymous with Mexicans. There were 
endless stories of Mexicans as people who were fleecing the healthcare 
system, sneaking across the border, being arrested at the border, that 
sort of thing.
I remember walking around on my first day in Guadalajara, watching 
the people going to work, rolling up tortillas in the marketplace, 
smoking, laughing. I remember first feeling slight surprise. And then, I 
was overwhelmed with shame. I realised that I had been so immersed 
in the media coverage of Mexicans that they had become one thing in 
my mind, the abject immigrant. I had bought into the single story of 
Mexicans and I could not have been more ashamed of myself.
So that is how to create a single story, show a people as one thing, as 
only one thing, over and over again, and that is what they become. …
Stories matter. Many stories matter. Stories have been used to 
dispossess and to malign, but stories can also be used to empower and 
to humanise. Stories can break the dignity of a people, but stories can 
also repair that broken dignity.
The American writer Alice Walker wrote this about her Southern 
relatives who had moved to the North. She introduced them to a book 
about the Southern life that they had left behind. ‘They sat around, 
reading the book themselves, listening to me read the book, and a kind 
of paradise was regained.’
I would like to end with this thought: That when we reject the single 
story, when we realise that there is never a single story about any 
place, we regain a kind of paradise.
60 
 
 
 
 
65 
 
 
 
70 
 
 
 
 
75
 
 
 
 
80 
 
 
 
85 
 
 
 
 
90
 
 
 
95 
 
 
 
100 
 
 
 
stove What do you notice about this 
paragraph?
AIDS Auto-immune Deficiency Syndrome, 
threat to life in some African countries.
fleecing Exploiting someone financially; 
robbing someone of their money
Guadalajara City in Mexico popular with 
tourists.
Alice Walker 20th-century African-
American writer.
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
99
This is a speech delivered to a conference with an educational theme. In it, 
Adichie discusses the power and influence that simple storytelling can have, 
particularly on the young. She shows from her own experience how stories can 
cause prejudices and that new stories are then needed to redress the balance. 
Her argument is even more compelling because she shows how she herself 
was vulnerable to just such influences.
She explains how all the stories she knew when she was growing up were 
European in outlook, perspective and characterisation, which led her to think 
that all stories had to be about white people. Then she shows that some 
Americans tend to have a very limited and simplified impression of Africa, 
not realising, for example, that there is such a thing as an educated Nigerian 
middle class. In the last part she explains how she herself had an equally 
limited view of Mexican culture, influenced by American worries about illegal 
immigration and drugs. 
In this speech, Adichie uses personal stories, or anecdotes, to persuade 
us that we need to hear or read a wide variety of stories to understand the 
peoples of the world. To rely on what she calls the ‘single story’ will never be 
enough.
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT 
Find key parts of the speech and consider what Adichie is trying to tell the reader (or in this case, the 
listener). Copy and complete the table, adding examples of your own. 
▼  DETAIL
▼  WHAT IT TELLS THE READER
‘my characters were white and blue-eyed, they played 
in the snow’ ….
That she took the material for her stories from her 
reading, not from her surroundings.
‘whose kinky hair could not form ponytails’
  
‘a beautifully patterned basket made of dyed raffia’
▼  IDENTIFYING KEY POINTS
ACTIVITY 1
AO1
AO1
Copy and complete the following table, identifying the themes of Adichie’s speech and adding any 
examples of your own.
▼  THEME
▼  QUOTATION
▼  COMMENT
Ignorance 
 
‘She… was confused when I said that 
Nigeria happened to have English as its 
official language.’
Like other examples in the speech, 
Adichie’s room-mate knows nothing 
about another culture.
Prejudice
 
 
Self-knowledge
 
 
Importance of stories
▼  IDENTIFYING KEY THEMES 
ACTIVITY 2
▲ Simple storytelling can have a powerful 
influence on young children
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
100
How does the writer use language and structure to explore identity?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations.
(12 marks)
AO2
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
The language of this passage is anecdotal and persuasive: it is evident that 
the writer is trying hard to communicate some linked experiences that were 
important to her in making her examine the way that people form prejudiced 
views of others. She tries to do this as concisely as possible. She uses 
narrative, detail, emotive language and makes comments about her thoughts 
and feelings.
The sentence structure is varied in the speech: compare the sentence 
beginning, ‘If I had not grown up in Nigeria…’ (lines 69 to 75), with the short 
simple sentence with which the passage begins. What do you think such 
variety contributes to a piece such as this? Speech-writing also offers the 
opportunity for less formal sentence structures than you would find in most 
written English. Can you find evidence of this? 
Copy and complete the following table, explaining as precisely as you 
can what you think the effect that each technique has on the audience. 
A simple way to start this is to put your finger at random on the 
passage, and try to find a linguistic technique or device in the sentence 
you’ve landed on.
▼  LINGUISTIC 
TECHNIQUES 
OR DEVICES
▼  QUOTATION
▼  EFFECT CREATED
Personal 
anecdote 
 
 
 
77–90: ‘I visited 
Mexico from the 
U.S…’ 
 
 
By explaining how she discovered that 
she has the kind of prejudice that she 
has experienced from others, she shows 
how universal prejudice is, and also 
that she doesn’t see herself as superior 
to others.
Anaphora 
(repetition of 
opening words 
of phrases which 
are next to each 
other)
64–67: ‘no 
possibility…’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Emotive language 
 
 
Use of short 
sentences
 
 
▼  IDENTIFYING LINGUISTIC TECHNIQUES AND DEVICES
ACTIVITY 3
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
anecdotal consisting of short stories based 
on someone’s personal experience
persuasive able to make other people 
believe something or do what you ask
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
101
All good persuasive speeches have a clear structure, enabling the audience 
to follow the points linked together in an argument. The structure of this 
speech is simple and effective. You can soon see that it is written in eighteen 
paragraphs. One way of analysing the structure would be to summarise the 
content of each paragraph in a sentence. Another way would be to divide the 
speech into sections and chart it that way. 
AO2
STRUCTURE
Copy and complete the table, noting how the content is divided up.
▼  PARAGRAPHS
▼  CONTENT
▼  COMMENT ON RELEVANCE TO 
ARGUMENT
1–3 
 
Her childhood 
reading and 
writing
This introduces the key theme and 
shows its impact on herself when 
very young.
Analyse the structure of the paragraphs as well and you will see that 
they are not all identical. Short paragraphs have an effect on the way we 
read them.
▼  IDENTIFYING EFFECTS OF STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY 4
KEY POINT
Persuasion is not only about language 
in terms of words used, but also about 
using structure to build credibility point 
by point.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE LEARNING, 
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
Imagine (if it is not true!) that you and your partner come from different 
cultures or countries and that you are meeting for the first time. Talk 
as honestly as you can about your expectations of each other, your 
prejudices and stereotypes.
▼  UNDERSTANDING ANOTHER’S CULTURE
ACTIVITY 5
AO2
1 ‘A student cannot be regarded as educated unless they are equipped 
with the ability both to examine cultural prejudice critically when they 
come across it and also to challenge it in discussion.’
You have been asked to give a speech to your class in which you 
express your views on this statement. The speech may consider:
 
◼
whether there is adequate provision in the curriculum and, if not, 
how it should be improved
 
◼
how the quality of discussion and debate on these issues might 
be improved
 
◼
any other points you wish to make.
▼  WRITING TASKS
ACTIVITY 6
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
102
I supposed I’d always envied him in a way, I mean he was good at sports, I mean 
I’m alright but he was obviusly excellent, and he was quite clever as well. I sort 
of resented the way he could do things quite easily. So I never really gave him 
much of a chance. I slagged him off to my friends saying he was arrogant and 
such (using some nice slangy phrases of course).
Later though he did me a good turn, though I didn’t deserve it. He spoke up for 
me when I was trying hard to get into the first XI, and said I deserved a chance. I 
honestly dont know why he did, but it made a diffrence. 
It happened like this……
In a school assembly the headteacher talked about an appalling civil war that 
had happened in part of Africa, and in which hundreds of thousands of people 
had been massacred, just because they were an ethnic minority. I had got used 
to people saying that we ought to respect the beliefs of others and I thought that 
pretty much all countries accepted this by now. I mean, I knew something about 
the holocaust in Europe during the Second World War – it was so terrible that it 
was a warning to the rest of the world never to do anything like that ever again.
But this was another attempt at genocide, in my own lifetime. I realised that I 
had been wrong. It was going to take much longer for the whole world to learn. If 
they ever did.
EXTRACTS FROM SAMPLE RESPONSES TO QUESTION 2 
Assess the answer above. Some of the aspects you might want to consider 
are: how does it manage information and ideas, does it address the intended 
reader, is it well structured, the accuracy of the spelling and grammar, and 
generally how well the text has achieved the task set by the question.
Now look at the answer above. How well does the writer communicate? Do 
you think the writer understands the needs of their reader? What do you think 
of the tone and the vocabulary used?’
AO2
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
How does the writer develop a persuasive argument? 
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
Your response will be marked for the accurate and appropriate use of 
vocabulary, spelling, punctuation and grammar.
2 Write about a time when you have been surprised by someone’s 
views or realised that your own views were wrong.
Your response could be real or imagined.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
103
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Find some information about George Alagiah. You can look at the BBC 
website.
2 Find out something about the civil war in Somalia, which began in the 
1990s.
3 In a small group or with a partner, share your ideas on the following 
questions.
 
▶ Why do you think people watch news on television? Do you watch it? If 
you don’t, why not?
 
▶ Have you ever watched a news programme reporting a war or a 
humanitarian crisis, such as a famine or an earthquake? What do you 
remember about it and the effect it had on you?
 
▶ Does television reporting of terrible events, such as floods or famines, 
help the people who are suffering?
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
George Alagiah was born in Sri Lanka, but when he was five 
years old his family moved to live in West Africa. He now lives in 
the United Kingdom and works as a newscaster for the BBC.
This passage comes from his book A Passage to Africa. In this 
autobiography, he writes about his life and experiences as a TV 
reporter working mainly across Africa. In this extract, he writes 
about a report he made when he was covering the civil war in 
Somalia for the BBC.
A PASSAGE TO AFRICA
GEORGE ALAGIAH
▶
▲ BBC newscaster George Alagiah
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
104
▼  FROM A PASSAGE TO AFRICA BY GEORGE ALAGIAH
I saw a thousand hungry, lean, scared and betrayed faces as I criss-
crossed Somalia between the end of 1991 and December 1992, but 
there is one I will never forget.
I was in a little hamlet just outside Gufgaduud, a village in the back of 
beyond, a place the aid agencies had yet to reach. In my notebook I had 
jotted down instructions on how to get there. ‘Take the Badale Road for 
a few kilometres til the end of the tarmac, turn right on to a dirt track, 
stay on it for about forty-five minutes – Gufgaduud. Go another fifteen 
minutes approx. – like a ghost village.’
In the ghoulish manner of journalists on the hunt for the most striking 
pictures, my cameraman and I tramped from one hut to another. What 
might have appalled us when we’d started our trip just a few days before 
no longer impressed us much. The search for the shocking is like the 
craving for a drug: you require heavier and more frequent doses the 
longer you’re at it. Pictures that stun the editors one day are written off 
as the same old stuff the next. This sounds callous, but it is just a fact of 
life. It’s how we collect and compile the images that so move people in 
the comfort of their sitting rooms back home.
There was Amina Abdirahman, who had gone out that morning in search 
of wild, edible roots, leaving her two young girls lying on the dirt floor 
of their hut. They had been sick for days, and were reaching the final, 
enervating stages of terminal hunger. Habiba was ten years old and her 
sister, Ayaan, was nine. By the time Amina returned, she had only one 
daughter. Habiba had died. No rage, no whimpering, just a passing away – 
that simple, frictionless, motionless deliverance from a state of half-life to 
death itself. It was, as I said at the time in my dispatch, a vision of ‘famine 
away from the headlines, a famine of quiet suffering and lonely death’.
There was the old woman who lay in her hut, abandoned by relations 
who were too weak to carry her on their journey to find food. It was the 
smell that drew me to her doorway: the smell of decaying flesh. Where 
her shinbone should have been there was a festering wound the size of 
my hand. She’d been shot in the leg as the retreating army of the deposed 
dictator took revenge on whoever it found in its way. The shattered leg 
had fused into the gentle V-shape of a boomerang. It was rotting; she was 
rotting. You could see it in her sick, yellow eyes and smell it in the putrid 
air she recycled with every struggling breath she took.
And then there was the face I will never forget.
My reaction to everyone else I met that day was a mixture of pity and 
revulsion. Yes, revulsion. The degeneration of the human body, sucked of 
its natural vitality by the twin evils of hunger and disease, is a disgusting 
thing. We never say so in our TV reports. It’s a taboo that has yet to be 
breached. To be in a feeding centre is to hear and smell the excretion of 
fluids by people who are beyond controlling their bodily functions. To 
be in a feeding centre is surreptitiously to wipe your hands on the back 
of your trousers after you’ve held the clammy palm of a mother who has 
just cleaned vomit from her child’s mouth.
There’s pity, too, because even in this state of utter despair they aspire 
to a dignity that is almost impossible to achieve. An old woman will 
cover her shrivelled body with a soiled cloth as your gaze turns towards 
▶
revulsion Disgust.
surreptitiously Secretly.
 
 
5 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
45 
▲ The civil war in Somalia began in 1991
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
105
her. Or the old and dying man who keeps his hoe next to the mat with 
which, one day soon, they will shroud his corpse, as if he means to go 
out and till the soil once all this is over.
I saw that face for only a few seconds, a fleeting meeting of eyes before the 
face turned away, as its owner retreated into the darkness of another hut. 
In those brief moments there had been a smile, not from me, but from the 
face. It was not a smile of greeting, it was not a smile of joy – how could 
it be? – but it was a smile nonetheless. It touched me in a way I could not 
explain. It moved me in a way that went beyond pity or revulsion.
What was it about that smile? I had to find out. I urged my translator to 
ask the man why he had smiled. He came back with an answer. ‘It’s just 
that he was embarrassed to be found in this condition,’ the translator 
explained. And then it clicked. That’s what the smile had been about. It 
was the feeble smile that goes with apology, the kind of smile you might 
give if you felt you had done something wrong.
Normally inured to stories of suffering, accustomed to the evidence 
of deprivation, I was unsettled by this one smile in a way I had never 
been before. There is an unwritten code between the journalist and 
his subjects in these situations. The journalist observes, the subject 
is observed. The journalist is active, the subject is passive. But this 
smile had turned the tables on that tacit agreement. Without uttering 
a single word, the man had posed a question that cut to the heart of 
the relationship between me and him, between us and them, between 
the rich world and the poor world. If he was embarrassed to be found 
weakened by hunger and ground down by conflict, how should I feel to 
be standing there so strong and confident?
I resolved there and then that I would write the story of Gufgaduud with 
all the power and purpose I could muster. It seemed at the time, and still 
does, the only adequate answer a reporter can give to the man’s question.
I have one regret about that brief encounter in Gufgaduud. Having 
searched through my notes and studied the dispatch that the BBC 
broadcast, I see that I never found out what the man’s name was. 
Yet meeting him was a seminal moment in the gradual collection of 
experiences we call context. Facts and figures are the easy part of 
journalism. Knowing where they sit in the great scheme of things is 
much harder. So, my nameless friend, if you are still alive, I owe you one.
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
George Alagiah’s purpose is to explain his role as a reporter, giving his 
thoughts and feelings about a particularly challenging incident. He is also 
trying to challenge us as readers, to make us think about our role.
The following questions will help you approach this aspect of the text. Read 
the text again and find answers to the following questions. Remember, more 
than one point can be made in answer to each question.
inured Hardened,
50 
 
 
 
55 
 
 
 
60 
 
 
 
65 
 
 
70 
 
 
 
 
75 
80
85
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
106
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
In this passage, George Alagiah is writing both as a journalist and about being 
a journalist. He describes what he saw in a vivid way, but at the same time 
he gives the reader an insight into the world of reporting, where journalists 
compete with each other to get the largest audience.
Complete the following table to think about the differing uses and kinds of 
language in the passage.
▼  QUESTION
▼  ANSWER AND EVIDENCE
What kinds of pictures and stories do the 
television news companies want? 
 
1 Powerful images – ‘the most striking 
pictures’ 
2 
3
What do the television news companies 
not want to show or report? 
 
1 Yesterday’s news – old pictures are 
‘written off as the same old stuff’ 
2 
3
What do we learn about TV audiences 
from this passage?
1
2
3
KEY POINT
The author of this passage used the 
smile as the central focus of the 
passage, to encourage the reader to 
discover it’s significance.
AO2
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
How does the writer use language and structure to create a sense of 
atmosphere?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
 
▶ In the extract from A Passage to Africa, can you find any other examples of 
things that seem to be the opposite of what they should be?
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
This smile is the key to a full understanding of the passage because it 
makes such an impact on the writer.
 
▶ Look at the following list of statements about the smile and then find 
a quotation to illustrate each one:
 
◼ it reverses roles 
 
◼ it asks questions
 
◼ it stimulates actions
 
◼ it affects the writer very powerfully.
 
▶ Now try to put into your own words what you think the importance of 
the smile is.
ACTIVITY 1
▼  THE MAN’S SMILE
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
107
▼  LANGUAGE STYLE
▼  EXAMPLE
Emotive words are used to convey the 
world of the victims. 
 
1 Adjectives emphasise their poverty – for 
example, ‘hungry’, ‘lean’, ‘scared’. 
2 
3
Words give you a vivid image of the 
world of the television journalist. 
1 They are like predators ‘on the hunt’. 
2 
3
Sentence structure is varied to engage the 
reader.
1 Incomplete sentences are used for effect.
2
3
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, INTERPRETATION, 
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
1 Imagine that you are a television or radio news reporter. 
 
▶ Describe a vivid and dramatic scene for a news item. You can either 
give this account live to the class or write the script for it.
 
▶ Write an entry for a personal diary giving your real thoughts and 
feelings about what you saw.
2 In his book, George Alagiah writes, ‘In global terms, if you have a roof 
over your head, food on the table, a doctor who will not charge you 
when you are ill and a school place that does not depend on your ability 
to pay, then, my friend, you are rich.’ Comment on this, giving your ideas 
on what makes you rich.
3 Write a short story entitled ‘The Smile’.
▼  WRITING TASKS
ACTIVITY 2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
108
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Do some research.
 
▶ Find some information about Kari Herbert. You can visit her website.
 
▶ Find out as much as you can about the Inughuit people (sometimes spelt 
Inuit and formerly known as Eskimo) and their way of life.
 
▶ Find pictures of narwhal and information about them.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Kari Herbert’s father was a polar explorer. She lived as a child 
with her family in northwest Greenland in the Arctic. She was so 
fascinated by the place that she returned there later as an adult 
to write about it.
The book from which this extract is taken is partly a memoir 
and partly a travel book, giving the reader information about 
this strange and beautiful place, its people and its animals. She 
found that the way of life of the Inughuit people of Greenland 
was changing due to the impact of the modern world. However 
they still retained aspects of their traditional way of life, such as 
hunting for food and driving teams of dogs.
A major part of the extract is an account of a hunt for narwhal. 
Hunting is a very emotive issue and many conservationists argue 
that whales should be protected. Kari Herbert’s feelings on this 
topic are divided. She sympathises with both the narwhal and the 
hunters, who face incredible danger. They hunt in kayaks in water 
so cold that they would die quickly if their kayak overturned.
THE EXPLORER’S DAUGHTER
KARI HERBERT
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
memoir a form of autobiography
▶
▶
GENERAL VOCABULARY
narwhal a species of whale, famous for 
the long single tusk on its head
kayak a type of canoe
▲ The Inughuit of the Arctic understand the intelligence of the narwhal
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
109
2 Some people think that hunting animals should be banned. In a small 
group or with a partner, share your ideas on the following questions.
 
▶ What arguments can you think of in favour of hunting animals?
 
▶ What arguments can you think of against hunting animals?
 
▶ Do you think hunting wild animals should be banned?
 
▶ How important is it to protect endangered species?
▼  FROM THE EXPLORER’S DAUGHTER BY KARI HERBERT
Two hours after the last of the hunters had returned and eaten, narwhal were 
spotted again, this time very close. Within an hour even those of us on shore 
could with the naked eye see the plumes of spray from the narwhal catching 
the light in a spectral play of colour. Two large pods of narwhal circled in 
the fjord, often looking as if they were going to merge, but always slowly, 
methodically passing each other by. Scrambling back up to the lookout 
I looked across the glittering kingdom in front of me and took a sharp 
intake of breath. The hunters were dotted all around the fjord. The evening 
light was turning butter-gold, glinting off man and whale and catching the 
soft billows of smoke from a lone hunter’s pipe. From where we sat at the 
lookout it looked as though the hunters were close enough to touch the 
narwhal with their bare hands and yet they never moved. Distances are 
always deceptive in the Arctic, and I fell to wondering if the narwhal existed 
at all or were instead mischievous tricks of the shifting light.
The narwhal rarely stray from High Arctic waters, escaping only to the 
slightly more temperate waters towards the Arctic Circle in the dead of 
winter, but never entering the warmer southern seas. In summer the hunters 
of Thule are fortunate to witness the annual return of the narwhal to the 
Inglefield Fjord, on the side of which we now sat.
The narwhal is an essential contributor to the survival of the hunters in 
the High Arctic. The mattak or blubber of the whale is rich in necessary 
minerals and vitamins, and in a place where the climate prohibits the growth 
of vegetables or fruit, this rich source of vitamin C was the one reason that 
the Eskimos have never suffered from scurvy. For centuries the blubber of 
the whales was also the only source of light and heat, and the dark rich meat 
is still a valuable part of the diet for both man and dogs (a single narwhal 
can feed a team of dogs for an entire month). Its single ivory tusk, which 
can grow up to six feet in length, was used for harpoon tips and handles for 
other hunting implements (although the ivory was found to be brittle and not 
hugely satisfactory as a weapon), for carving protective tupilaks, and even 
as a central beam for their small ancient dwellings. Strangely, the tusk seems 
to have little use for the narwhal itself; they do not use the tusk to break 
through ice as a breathing hole, nor will they use it to catch or attack prey, 
but rather the primary use seems to be to disturb the top of the sea bed in 
order to catch Arctic halibut for which they have a particular predilection. 
Often the ends of their tusks are worn down or even broken from such usage.
The women clustered on the knoll of the lookout, binoculars pointing in 
every direction, each woman focusing on her husband or family member, 
occasionally spinning round at a small gasp or jump as one of the women 
saw a hunter near a narwhal. Each wife knew her husband instinctively and 
watched their progress intently; it was crucial to her that her husband catch 
pods Small groups of whales.
fjord A long, narrow strip of the sea, 
between steep mountains.
mattak or blubber The fatty skin of the 
whale.
scurvy A painful, weakening disease 
caused by lack of vitamin C.
tupilaks Charms or figures with magical 
powers.
predilection Liking.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
110
a narwhal – it was part of their staple diet, and some of the mattak and 
meat could be sold to other hunters who hadn’t been so lucky, bringing in 
some much-needed extra income. Every hunter was on the water. It was like 
watching a vast, waterborne game with the hunters spread like a net around 
the sound.
The narwhal are intelligent creatures, their senses are keen and they talk to 
one another under the water. Their hearing is particularly developed and they 
can hear the sound of a paddling kayak from a great distance. That was why 
the hunters had to sit so very still in the water.
One hunter was almost on top of a pair of narwhal, and they were huge. 
He gently picked up his harpoon and aimed – in that split second my heart 
leapt for both hunter and narwhal. I urged the man on in my head; he was 
so close, and so brave to attempt what he was about to do – he was miles 
from land in a flimsy kayak, and could easily be capsized and drowned. The 
hunter had no rifle, only one harpoon with two heads and one bladder. It was 
a foolhardy exercise and one that could only inspire respect. And yet at the 
same time my heart also urged the narwhal to dive, to leave, to survive.
This dilemma stayed with me the whole time that I was in Greenland. I 
understand the harshness of life in the Arctic and the needs of the hunters 
and their families to hunt and live on animals and sea mammals that we 
demand to be protected because of their beauty. And I know that one cannot 
afford to be sentimental in the Arctic. ‘How can you possibly eat seal?’ I have 
been asked over and over again. True, the images that bombarded us several 
years ago of men battering seals for their fur hasn’t helped the issue of polar 
hunting, but the Inughuit do not kill seals using this method, nor do they kill 
for sport. They use every part of the animals they kill, and most of the food 
in Thule is still brought in by the hunter-gatherers and fishermen. Imported 
goods can only ever account for part of the food supply; there is still only 
one annual supply ship that makes it through the ice to Qaanaaq, and the 
small twice-weekly plane from West Greenland can only carry a certain 
amount of goods. Hunting is still an absolute necessity in Thule.
▲ Traditional ways of life in the Arctic are under threat
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
111
The extract has many purposes and the writer uses language in different ways 
to fulfil these. She uses description to convey the beauty of the setting, gives 
us information about the Inughuit and the narwhal, dramatises the hunt and 
gives us an insight into her own thoughts and feelings. Copy and complete the 
following table to help you sort out these various strands.
▼  LANGUAGE STYLE
▼  EVIDENCE
Language to convey the effects of light. 
 
1 ‘glittering kingdom’ 
2 
3
Language to give information: 
factual, scientific, other specialised 
language. 
 
 
1 Precise scientific language makes the 
information more authoritative – for 
example, ‘[Its] mattak or blubber… is rich 
in necessary minerals and vitamins’. 
2 
3
Language to create tension. 
 
 
 
1 The way the women react suggests their 
nervousness – for example, ‘spinning 
round at a small gasp’. 
2 
3
Language to show the conflict in the 
writer’s personal feelings and thoughts.
1
2
3
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
Kari Herbert sympathises with both hunter and hunted. The writer’s central 
purposes are to convey the tension of the subject but also its beauty. You 
need to examine the different ways in which the writer does these things within 
the same passage. Copy and complete the following table with answers and 
evidence from the extract.
▼  QUESTION
▼  ANSWER AND EVIDENCE
Why do the Inughuit hunt the narwhal? 
Find as many reasons as you can. 
 
 
1 Narwhal meat provides food – ‘a 
valuable part of the diet for both man and 
dogs’. 
2 
3
What details show the difficulties and 
dangers faced by the Inughuit in the hunt? 
1 
2 
3
What details show the writer’s respect and 
sympathy for the narwhal?
1
2
3
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
112
SKILLS
REASONING, CREATIVITY,  
INNOVATION
AO2
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
How does the writer use language and structure to explore the hunter’s way of 
life?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
1 Write about a place you know well, or have recently re-visited, that 
has changed significantly in the time that you have known it. Analyse 
the ways in which it has changed, giving your thoughts about these 
changes.
2 Some people think that not enough is being done to preserve 
traditions and customs. What aspects of your way of life would you 
most want to keep and why?
▼  WRITING TASKS
ACTIVITY 1
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
113
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Do some research. You might want to look at the original article.
Compare this with how it was reported search for ‘antarctic helicopter 
crash 2003’.
2 In a small group or with a partner, share your ideas on the following 
questions.
 
▶ Do you think that it is fair that the taxpayers have to pay for these 
explorers and others like them to be rescued?
 
▶ What do you see as the advantages and disadvantages of:
 
◼ requiring all explorers to buy additional insurance
 
◼ requiring all explorers to buy licences from the government, 
without which they would not be allowed to explore
 
◼ requiring explorers to do community work to repay any taxpayers’ 
money spent on rescuing them?
▶
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
This is a newspaper article that tells the story of two men 
rescued by the Chilean Navy when their helicopter crashed in the 
sea in the Antarctic.
EXPLORERS, OR BOYS MESSING ABOUT? 
STEVEN MORRIS
▶
▲ Sunset over the Antarctic Ocean
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
114
▼   ‘EXPLORERS, OR BOYS MESSING ABOUT? EITHER WAY, 
TAXPAYER GETS RESCUE BILL’ BY STEVEN MORRIS
Adapted from an article published in The Guardian newspaper, 
January 28, 2003.
Their last expedition ended in farce when the Russians threatened to send 
in military planes to intercept them as they tried to cross into Siberia via the 
icebound Bering Strait.
Yesterday a new adventure undertaken by British explorers Steve Brooks and 
Quentin Smith almost led to tragedy when their helicopter plunged into the 
sea off Antarctica.
The men were plucked from the icy water by a Chilean naval ship after a 
nine-hour rescue which began when Mr Brooks contacted his wife, Jo Vestey, 
on his satellite phone asking for assistance. The rescue involved the Royal 
Navy, the RAF and British coastguards.
Last night there was resentment in some quarters that the men’s adventure 
had cost the taxpayers of Britain and Chile tens of thousands of pounds.
Experts questioned the wisdom of taking a small helicopter – the four-seater 
Robinson R44 has a single engine – into such a hostile environment.
There was also confusion about what exactly the men were trying to achieve. 
A website set up to promote the Bering Strait expedition claims the team 
were planning to fly from the north to south pole in their ‘trusty helicopter’.
But Ms Vestey claimed she did not know what the pair were up to, describing 
them as ‘boys messing about with a helicopter’.
The drama began at around 1 am British time when Mr Brooks, 42, and 
40-year-old Mr Smith, also known as Q, ditched into the sea 100 miles off 
Antarctica, about 36 miles north of Smith Island, and scrambled into their 
liferaft.
Mr Brooks called his wife in London on his satellite phone. She said: ‘He said 
they were both in the liferaft but were okay and could I call the emergency 
people?’
Meanwhile, distress signals were being beamed from the ditched helicopter 
and from Mr Brooks’ Breitling emergency watch, a wedding present.
The signals from the aircraft were deciphered by Falmouth coastguard and 
passed on to the rescue coordination centre at RAF Kinloss in Scotland.
The Royal Navy’s ice patrol ship, HMS Endurance, which was 180 miles 
away surveying uncharted waters, began steaming towards the scene and 
dispatched its two Lynx helicopters.
One was driven back because of poor visibility but the second was on its way 
when the men were picked up by a Chilean naval vessel at about 10.20 am 
British time.
Though the pair wore survival suits and the weather at the spot where 
they ditched was clear, one Antarctic explorer told Mr Brooks’ wife it was 
‘nothing short of a miracle’ that they had survived.
▶
Falmouth Coastal town in Cornwall, 
England.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
115
Both men are experienced adventurers. Mr Brooks, a property developer 
from London, has taken part in expeditions to 70 countries in 15 years. He 
has trekked solo to Everest base camp and walked barefoot for three days 
in the Himalayas. He has negotiated the white water rapids of the Zambezi 
river by kayak and survived a charge by a silver back gorilla in the Congo. 
He is also a qualified mechanical engineer and pilot.
He and his wife spent their honeymoon flying the helicopter from Alaska to 
Chile. The 16,000-mile trip took three months.
Mr Smith, also from London, claims to have been flying since the age of 
five. He has twice flown a helicopter around the globe and won the world 
freestyle helicopter flying championship. Despite their experience, it is not the 
first time they have hit the headlines for the wrong reasons.
In April, Mr Brooks and another explorer, Graham Stratford, were poised 
to become the first to complete a crossing of the 56-mile wide frozen Bering 
Strait between the US and Russia in an amphibious vehicle, Snowbird VI, 
which could carve its way through ice floes and float in the water in between.
But they were forced to call a halt after the Russian authorities told them 
they would scramble military helicopters to lift them off the ice if they 
crossed the border.
Ironically, one of the aims of the expedition, for which Mr Smith provided air 
back-up, was to demonstrate how good relations between east and west had 
become.
The wisdom of the team’s latest adventure was questioned by, among others, 
Günter Endres, editor of Jane’s Helicopter Markets and Systems, who said: 
‘I’m surprised they used the R44. I wouldn’t use a helicopter like that to go 
so far over the sea. It sounds as if they were pushing it to the maximum.’
A spokesman for the pair said it was not known what had gone wrong. The 
flying conditions had been ‘excellent’.
The Ministry of Defence said the taxpayer would pick up the bill, as was 
normal in rescues in the UK and abroad. The spokesperson said it was ‘highly 
unlikely’ it would recover any of the money.
Last night the men were on their way to the Chilean naval base Eduardo 
Frei, where HMS Endurance was to pick them up. Ms Vestey said: ‘They 
have been checked and appear to be well. I don’t know what will happen to 
them once they have been picked up by HMS Endurance – they’ll probably 
have their bottoms kicked and be sent home the long way.’
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
On the surface, this may appear to be an information text, as the article 
explains what happened to the two men and how they were rescued. However, 
the writer also takes a strongly critical stance on what he sees as irresponsible 
behaviour on the part of the two explorers. The key to understanding the 
article is in recognising how the writer makes his opinions clear. 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
116
GENERAL VOCABULARY
irony using words to convey a meaning 
that is completely opposite to their 
apparent meaning
AO2
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
How does the writer use language and structure to detail their opinion on the 
event?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(12 marks)
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
Think of a recent event or situation of which you have personal 
experience, and about which you have a critical opinion. Write a short 
account, including factual details, but using what you have learnt from 
the extract, find ways to express your opinions as well.
▼  OPINION AND FACT
ACTIVITY 2
▼  EXPLORING OPINIONS
ACTIVITY 1
Copy and complete the following table, finding explanations and 
evidence of the writer’s opinions.
▼  THE WRITER’S OPINIONS 
▼  EXPLANATION AND EVIDENCE
The two explorers are presented 
as childish. 
 
 
 
1 Mr Smith has a nickname, which 
suggests a juvenile nature. 
2 When they get in trouble they phone 
home, like running home to their mother. 
3 Ms Vestey dismisses them as ‘boys’ and 
describes their behaviour as ‘messing about’.
The writer uses irony to express 
his opinions. 
 
 
1 Mr Smith’s nickname is ironic as Q is 
the character from the James Bond films 
who is good with technical devices. 
2 
3
The two explorers are not really 
as expert as they claim to be. 
1 
2 
3
The Navy is used to criticise the 
two men. 
 
1 
2 
3
The writer uses experts to voice 
his criticisms for him. 
1 
2 
3
The writer uses emotive language.
1
2
3
 
▶ Write a single paragraph that directly expresses how the writer feels, rather 
than using the range of indirect criticisms that the writer uses in the text.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
117
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Read about Aron Ralston and his experience. If you are able to, watch 
127 Hours, the 2010 film on the same subject.
2 Think about what attracts people to potentially dangerous outdoor 
activities and sports. Is it a love of adventure? A sense of boredom? Or 
something else entirely?
3 Share any accounts of survival or lucky escapes that you have heard or 
read about.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Between a Rock and a Hard Place is an autobiography written by 
Aron Ralston, an engineer turned outdoorsman and motivational 
speaker. It relates his experience of being trapped for five days 
and seven hours in Blue John Canyon of the Utah desert in the 
southern United States, in 2003. 
His right arm was trapped by a boulder and, unable to free 
himself, he amputated his arm using a blunt pocketknife. He then 
had to return through the canyon and climb down a 20-metre 
slope before he could reach safety and receive medical care.
BETWEEN A ROCK AND A HARD PLACE
ARON RALSTON
▶
▶
▲ Blue John Canyon, Utah, USA
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
118
▼   FROM BETWEEN A ROCK AND A HARD PLACE BY ARON 
RALSTON
In this first-hand account, Ralston describes how a boulder crushed 
his right hand while he was climbing and hiking in a canyon. He had 
not informed anyone of his hiking plans. 
I come to another drop-off. This one is maybe eleven or twelve feet high, 
a foot higher and of a different geometry than the overhang I descended 
ten minutes ago. Another chockstone is wedged between the walls, ten feet 
downstream from and at the same height as the ledge. It gives the space 
below the drop-off the claustrophobic feel of a short tunnel. Instead of the 
walls widening after the drop-off, or opening into a bowl at the bottom of 
the canyon, here the slot narrows to a consistent three feet across at the lip of 
the drop-off and continues at that width for fifty feet down the canyon.
Sometimes in narrow passages like this one, it’s possible for me to stem 
my body across the slot, with my feet and back pushing out in opposite 
directions against the walls. Controlling this counter pressure by switching 
my hands and feet on the opposing walls, I can move up or down the 
shoulder width crevice fairly easily as long as the friction contact stays solid 
between the walls and my hands, feet, and back. This technique is known as 
stemming or chimneying; you can imagine using it to climb up the inside of a 
chimney.
Just below the ledge where I’m standing is a chockstone the size of a large 
bus tire, stuck fast in the channel between the walls, a few feet out from the 
lip. If I can step onto it, then I’ll have a nine foot height to descend, less than 
that of the first overhang. I’ll dangle off the chockstone, then take a short fall 
onto the rounded rocks piled on the canyon floor.
Stemming across the canyon at the lip of the drop-off, with one foot and one 
hand on each of the walls, I traverse out to the chockstone. I press my back 
against the south wall and lock my left knee, which pushes my foot tight 
against the north wall. With my right foot, I kick at the boulder to test how 
stuck it is. It’s jammed tightly enough to hold my weight. I lower myself from 
the chimneying position and step onto the chockstone. It supports me but 
teeters slightly. After confirming that I don’t want to chimney down from the 
chockstone’s height, I squat and grip the rear of the lodged boulder, turning 
to face back upcanyon. Sliding my belly over the front edge, I can lower 
myself and hang from my fully extended arms, akin to climbing down from 
the roof of a house.
As I dangle, I feel the stone respond to my adjusting grip with a scraping 
quake as my body’s weight applies enough torque to disturb it from its 
position. Instantly, I know this is trouble, and instinctively, I let go of the 
rotating boulder to land on the round rocks below. When I look up, the 
backlit chockstone falling toward my head consumes the sky. Fear shoots my 
hands over my head. I can’t move backward or I’ll fall over a small ledge. My 
only hope is to push off the falling rock and get my head out of its way.
The next three seconds play out at a tenth of their normal speed. Time 
dilates, as if I’m dreaming, and my reactions decelerate. In slow motion: 
the rock smashes my left hand against the south wall; my eyes register the 
collision, and I yank my left arm back as the rock ricochets; the boulder 
then crushes my right hand and ensnares my right arm at the wrist, palm 
▶
drop-off A sheer downward slope.
chockstone A stone that has become 
stuck between rocks.
overhang A part of something (in this case, 
the rock) that extends over something else.
traverse Cross.
teeters Balance unsteadily.
torque Rotating force.
ricochet Bounces off.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
119
in, thumb up, fingers extended; the rock slides another foot down the wall 
with my arm in tow, tearing the skin off the lateral side of my forearm. Then 
silence.
My disbelief paralyzes me temporarily as I stare at the sight of my arm 
vanishing into an implausibly small gap between the fallen boulder and the 
canyon wall. Within moments, my nervous system’s pain response overcomes 
the initial shock. Good God, my hand. The flaring agony throws me into a 
panic. I grimace and growl … My mind commands my body, ‘Get your hand 
out of there!’ I yank my arm three times in a naive attempt to pull it out. But 
I’m stuck.
Anxiety has my brain tweaking; searing-hot pain shoots from my wrist 
up my arm. I’m frantic, and I cry out... My desperate brain conjures up 
a probably apocryphal story in which an adrenaline-stoked mom lifts an 
overturned car to free her baby. I’d give it even odds that it’s made up, but I 
do know for certain that right now, while my body’s chemicals are raging at 
full flood, is the best chance I’ll have to free myself with brute force. I shove 
against the large boulder, heaving against it, pushing with my left hand, 
lifting with my knees pressed under the rock. I get good leverage with the 
aid of a twelve-inch shelf in front of my feet. Standing on that, I brace my 
thighs under the boulder and thrust upward repeatedly, grunting, ‘Come on…
move!’ Nothing.
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
This extract from Between a Rock and a Hard Place describes the place where 
the accident occurred and the event itself. Aron Ralston describes the events 
in great detail. He recreates the scene of the accident effectively. As he is 
writing for a general audience, he explains the terminology related to climbing 
as well as the reasons behind the different things he does. His clearheaded 
and analytical thinking pattern is effectively brought out as well as his ability to 
react quickly and to take action in the face of an unexpected problem.
As this is an autobiography, it is written in the first person and has many 
factual details that makes it feel authentic. Because it narrates a stressful 
situation, the present tense is used. This gives it a sense of immediacy and 
makes the reader feel as though they are there with the writer as the events 
unfold.
apocryphal Doubtful, untrue.
▲ Another chockstone is wedged between the walls
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
120
Ralston’s style is largely factual and analytical. He is very clear and precise in 
what he says about the events and his reactions. His use of minute details and 
his step-by-step narrative style are strong techniques that he uses to make his 
writing effective and interesting.
Copy and complete the following table, identifying different pieces of information or descriptive detail given in the 
passage. Explain how each detail helps us to understand the writer’s character or feelings. 
▼  INFORMATION/DESCRIPTION
▼  ANSWER AND COMMENT
‘Instead of the walls widening after the drop-off, or opening 
into a bowl at the bottom of the canyon, here the slot 
narrows to a consistent three feet across at the lip of the 
drop-off and continues at that width for fifty feet down the 
canyon.’
This information shows us that he is able to assess his 
surroundings in an accurate and analytical manner. He uses 
terms such as ‘consistent three feet’ which shows that he is 
skilled at gauging distance – a necessary skill for a climber. 
‘With my right foot, I kick at the boulder to test how stuck it 
is.’
 
 
▶ From the second paragraph, find two phrases that show the writer is careful.
▼  DESCRIPTIVE LANGUAGE
ACTIVITY 1
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
Copy and complete the following table, thinking about other techniques that the writer has used and their effect. 
▼  TECHNIQUE
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  EFFECT
Emotive language 
 
 
‘flaring agony’ 
 
 
This phrase shows the extent of the pain the writer feels as the 
first shock wears off. The word ‘flaring’ shows how the pain 
rapidly grows and spreads, while the word ‘agony’ shows how 
extremely painful it is. 
Direct speech 
 
 
Variety in punctuation 
 
 
 
‘akin to climbing down from 
the roof of a house’
 
Personification 
 
 
▼  LANGUAGE FOR EFFECT
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
121
How does the writer use language and structure to capture the interest of the 
reader?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
Ralston uses a variety of sentence styles to make his writing interesting. Copy and complete the following table 
with examples of each type and explain the effect.
▼  TYPE OF SENTENCE
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  EFFECT
Long complex sentences 
 
 
Short sentences 
 
 
Incomplete sentences
▼  SENTENCE STYLE
ACTIVITY 3
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
WRITING TASKS
1 Write a magazine article giving your views on the statement: ‘Extreme 
situations bring out the best in all of us’. In the article, you may include:
 
◼
anecdotal incidents that support this statement
 
◼
the positives and negatives of facing extreme situations
 
◼
any other points you wish to make.
2 In 1910, Robert Scott, an English naval officer and explorer, led an 
expedition to the South Pole. Three explorers from this group set out in 
July 1911 to collect emperor penguin eggs to be studied by scientists back 
home. After 35 days they managed to return to base camp with three eggs. 
During this trip, the three explorers faced extreme hardship due to cold and 
weather. Imagine that you are one of the explorers and write a diary entry 
detailing one day of the journey.
The following is a candidate’s answer to the question, ‘In your own words 
explain what the writer’s thought and feelings are in paragraph 5’. The 
annotations show some of the strengths of the answer. You may wish to add 
other comments pointing out other strengths or weaknesses.
HOW TO WRITE A SUCCESSFUL 
ANSWER
In this paragraph the writer feels worried as he is unsure whether the stone that 
he is balancing on will hold. The movement of the stone alerts him to danger 
and reacts quickly. He is very frightened as he watches the stone falling towards 
him, but he is also able to make a quick decision and react. He doesn’t give 
up and wait but thinks of what action he can take and picks the only option 
available to him which is to push the stone away.
in this paragraph Addresses the 
question directly.
unsure Focuses on a specific feeling.
he is also able to make a quick 
decision and react His thoughts are 
given in the candidate’s own words.
Using this answer as a guide, write your own answer to the following question.
 
▶ In your own words, explain the writer’s feelings and reactions in paragraph 7.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
AO2
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
KEY POINT
First person narration is often noted 
for its level of detail. This can enable 
the writer to write with immediacy and 
power.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
122
BEFORE YOU START READING 
1 Find out more about the author and his very unusual background before 
he became a highly regarded poet and author. Find out what you can 
about borstals, reform schools and life in poor inner-city areas of Britain. 
Write down your thoughts and highlight what you think makes a typical 
writer. Is Zephaniah what you would consider to be a ‘traditional’ writer? 
2 Read the following example of Zephaniah’s poetry, entitled White 
Comedy. Look at the way that Zephaniah uses the words ‘white’ and 
‘black’ and the way that they affect other words. Look at some other 
examples of his poetry. What common themes can you identify within 
his poems?
I waz whitemailed 
By a white witch, 
Wid white magic 
An white lies, 
Branded by a white sheep 
I slaved as a whitesmith 
Near a white spot 
Where I suffered whitewater fever. 
Whitelisted as a whiteleg 
I waz in de white book 
As a master of white art, 
It waz like white death.  
People called me white jack 
Some hailed me as a white wog, 
So I joined de white watch 
Trained as a white guard 
Lived off the white economy. 
Caught and beaten by de 
whiteshirts 
I waz condemned to a white mass, 
Don’t worry, 
I shall be writing to de Black 
House. 
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Benjamin Zephaniah has earned widespread respect for his ability to overcome spite, prejudice and 
ridicule. Because of his difficulties with reading, his teachers dismissed him as unintelligent and 
not worthy of their attention. Rejected by a number of schools, he was unable to read when he left 
education at the age of thirteen. Unusually and bravely, he refused to give in to despair, acknowledged 
his difficulties and joined an adult reading class. Since then, he has taken an imaginative and 
constructive approach to life’s challenges.
In this article from The Guardian newspaper, Zephaniah explains how this happened, from his early 
difficulties in school to his determination to write. He performed some of his early work in church at 
the age of 11, but found himself with a criminal record two years later. Despite this troubled period, he 
has gone on to become a successful poet and writer. His publication within a well-regarded national 
newspaper can be seen as an ironic contrast to his earlier life. 
‘YOUNG AND DYSLEXIC? YOU’VE GOT IT GOING ON’
BENJAMIN ZEPHANIAH
▶
▶
▲ Poet Benjamin Zephaniah
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
123
▼   ‘YOUNG AND DYSLEXIC? YOU’VE GOT IT GOING ON’  
BY BENJAMIN ZEPHANIAH 
This article was published in The Guardian, 2 October 2015, and is adapted 
from Zephaniah’s contribution to Creative, Successful, Dyslexic (Jessica 
Kingsley, 2015).
As a child I suffered, but learned to turn dyslexia to my advantage, to see the 
world more creatively. We are the architects, we are the designers. 
I’m of the generation where teachers didn’t know what dyslexia was. The big 
problem with the education system then was that there was no compassion, 
no understanding and no humanity. I don’t look back and feel angry with 
the teachers. The ones who wanted to have an individual approach weren’t 
allowed to. The idea of being kind and thoughtful and listening to problems 
just wasn’t done: the past is a different kind of country.
At school my ideas always contradicted the teachers’. I remember one teacher 
saying that human beings sleep for one-third of their life and I put my 
hand up and said, ‘If there’s a God isn’t that a design fault? If you’ve built 
something, you want efficiency. If I was God I would have designed sleep so 
we could stay awake. Then good people could do one-third more good in the 
world.’
The teacher said, ‘Shut up, stupid boy. Bad people would do one-third more 
bad.’ I thought I’d put in a good idea. I was just being creative. She also had 
a point, but the thing was she called me stupid for even thinking about it.
I remember a teacher talking about Africa and the ‘local savages’ and I would 
say, ‘Who are you to talk about savages?’ She would say, ‘How dare you 
challenge me?’ – and that would get me into trouble. 
Once, when I was finding it difficult to engage with writing and had asked 
for some help, a teacher said, ‘It’s all right. We can’t all be intelligent, but 
you’ll end up being a good sportsperson, so why don’t you go outside 
and play some football?’ I thought, ‘Oh great’, but now I realise he was 
stereotyping me.
I had poems in my head even then, and when I was 10 or 11 my sister wrote 
some of them down for me. When I was 13 I could read very basically but 
it would be such hard work that I would give up. I thought that so long as 
you could read how much the banknote was worth, you knew enough or you 
could ask a mate.
I got thrown out of a lot of schools, the last one at 13. I was expelled partly 
because of arguing with teachers on an intellectual level and partly for being 
a rude boy and fighting. I didn’t stab anybody, but I did take revenge on a 
teacher once. I stole his car and drove it into his front garden. I remember 
him telling us the Nazis weren’t that bad.
He could say that in the classroom. When I was in borstal I used to do this 
thing of looking at people I didn’t want to be like. I saw a guy who spent all 
his time sitting stooped over and I thought, ‘I don’t want to be like that,’ so I 
learned to sit with a straight back. Being observant helped me make the right 
choices.
A high percentage of the prison population are dyslexic, and a high 
percentage of the architect population. If you look at the statistics, I should 
▶
dyslexia Difficulties with reading despite 
normal intelligence.
the past is a different kind of  
country Life was different in the past.
contradict Challenge what someone has 
said.
stereotyping Making unwarranted 
assumptions about someone or something.
borstal A residential training centre for 
young people who are in trouble.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
124
be in prison: a black man brought up on the wrong side of town whose 
family fell apart, in trouble with the police when I was a kid, unable to read 
and write, with no qualifications and, on top of that, dyslexic. But I think 
staying out of prison is about conquering your fears and finding your path in 
life.
When I go into prisons to talk to people I see men and women who, in 
intelligence and other qualities, are the same as me. But opportunities opened 
for me and they missed theirs, didn’t notice them or didn’t take them.
I never thought I was stupid. I didn’t have that struggle. If I have someone in 
front of me who doesn’t have a problem reading and writing telling me that 
black people are savages I just think, ‘I’m not stupid – you’re the one who’s 
stupid.’ I just had self-belief.
For my first book I told my poems to my girlfriend, who wrote them down 
for me. It really took off, especially within the black community. I wrote ‘wid 
luv’ for ‘with love’. People didn’t think they were dyslexic poems, they just 
thought I wrote phonetically.
At 21 I went to an adult education class in London to learn to read and 
write. 
I wrote more poetry, novels for teenagers, plays, other books and recorded 
music. I take poetry to people who do not read poetry. Still now, when I’m 
writing the word ‘knot’, I have to stop and think, ‘How do I write that?’ I 
have to draw something to let me know what the word is to come back to it 
later. If I can’t spell ‘question’ I just put a question mark and come back to 
it later. The teacher told me, ‘You are dyslexic,’ and I was like, ‘Do I need an 
operation?’ She explained to me what it meant and I suddenly thought, ‘Ah, I 
get it. I thought I was going crazy.’
When I look at a book, the first thing I see is the size of it, and I know that’s 
what it’s like for a lot of young people who find reading tough. When Brunel 
University offered me the job of professor of poetry and creative writing, I 
knew my students would be officially more educated than me. I tell them, 
‘You can do this course and get the right grade because you have a good 
memory – but if you don’t have passion, creativity, individuality, there’s no 
point.’ In my life now, I find that people accommodate my dyslexia. I can 
perform my poetry because it doesn’t have to be word perfect, but I never 
read one of my novels in public. When I go to literary festivals I always get 
an actor to read it out for me. Otherwise all my energy goes into reading the 
book and the mood is lost.
If someone can’t understand dyslexia it’s their problem. In the same way, if 
someone oppresses me because of my race I don’t sit down and think, ‘How 
can I become white?’ It’s not my problem, it’s theirs and they are the ones 
who have to come to terms with it.
If you’re dyslexic and you feel there’s something holding you back, just 
remember: it’s not you. In many ways being dyslexic is a natural way to be.
What’s unnatural is the way we read and write. If you look at a pictorial 
language like Chinese, you can see the word for a woman because the 
character looks like a woman. The word for a house looks like a house. It is 
a strange step to go from that to a squiggle that represents a sound.
So don’t be heavy on yourself. And if you are a parent of someone with 
▶
accommodate Make adjustments for 
someone or something.
oppresses Makes someone feel inadequate 
or worthless and limit their freedom.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
125
This newspaper article is drawn from Zephaniah’s contribution to a book about 
how dyslexic people can be successful. He presents himself as someone 
who has found ways of coping with dyslexia, persuading other dyslexics that 
they should not regard dyslexia as an obstacle, but as an opportunity to be 
creative, rather than restricted.
In a relatively short space, Zephaniah introduces a number of important points. 
Mainly, he does this by using short, tightly-written paragraphs so that in a 
matter of a few minutes we learn what the author understands as the essential 
elements of his coping with dyslexia. 
dyslexia don’t think of it as a defect. Dyslexia is not a measure of intelligence: 
you may have a genius on your hands. Having dyslexia can make you 
creative. If you want to construct a sentence and can’t find the word you 
are searching for, you have to think of a way to write round it. This requires 
being creative and so your ‘creativity muscle’ gets bigger.
Kids come up to me and say, ‘I’m dyslexic too,’ and I say to them, ‘Use it to 
your advantage, see the world differently. Us dyslexic people, we’ve got it 
going on – we are the architects. We are the designers.’ It’s like these kids are 
proud to be like me and if that helps them, that is great. I didn’t have that as 
a child. I say to them, ‘Bloody nondyslexics … who do they think they are?’
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT 
Copy and complete the following table, analysing what the examples 
from the article illustrate.
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  WHAT THE WRITER IS SAYING
‘no compassion, no understanding 
and no humanity’
These words show Zephaniah’s view 
of his time in school.
‘She also had a point.’
 
‘such hard work that I would give up’
 
‘But opportunities opened for me and 
they missed theirs’
 
‘Do I need an operation?’
 
‘I don’t sit down and think, “How can 
I become white?”’
▼  ANALYSING THE ARTICLE
ACTIVITY 1
defect Something that prevents proper 
functioning or a problem.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
126
Copy and complete the following table. Find evidence of each feature 
and discuss your findings.
▼  THEME
▼  COMMENT
▼  EVIDENCE
Failed schooling 
 
 
 
 
Zephaniah tells us about 
his poor start in life, 
which contrasts with 
what he achieves later 
despite the difficulties 
faced at school.
 
 
 
 
 
Challenging teachers
 
 
Things not being what 
they seemed / what 
people would expect 
them to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
Escaping, avoiding 
things and coping
 
 
Turning things round
 
 
Creativity
▼  THEMES AND IDEAS
ACTIVITY 2
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
An even tone is maintained in the opening paragraphs, despite the fact that 
Zephaniah is describing events that troubled him at the time. He reports events 
without reacting to them. In this way, readers are encouraged to draw their 
own conclusions, and this will make Zephaniah’s points more convincing. 
On two occasions, he simply tells readers what he thought when faced with 
teacher’s whose comments troubled him. This shows the reader an example of 
his reacting without making things worse. Zephaniah shows his self-restraint 
when provoked. In his final two paragraphs, he provides encouragement 
and a challenge with the striking phrases, ‘creativity muscle’ and ‘Bloody 
nondyslexics … who do they think they are?’
A short, introductory paragraph conveys Zephaniah’s conclusion from the 
outset and engages with the reader: ‘We are the architects, we are the 
designers’. The writing is matter-of-fact and lacks self-pity. From being thrown 
out of schools to his appointment as a professor of poetry at a university, he 
presents important events in his life in chronological order, to show how he 
came to see beyond his troubles as a teenager to turn them into something 
positive, from which both he and the reader can learn.
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION
KEY POINT
Sometimes, non-fiction writers hold 
back from giving their full reaction to 
create a space in which the reader can 
fill with their own reaction.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
127
Copy and complete the following table, explaining the techniques that 
Zephaniah uses in these extracts to achieve his purposes. A clue has 
been provided in each case.
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  CLUE
▼  TECHNIQUE
‘I had poems in my head even 
then’
Metaphor. 
 
‘I saw a guy who spent all his 
time sitting stooped over and 
I thought, ‘I don’t want to be 
like that,’ so I learned to sit 
with a straight back.’
Look at the main 
verbs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘If you look at the statistics, 
I should be in prison: a black 
man brought up on the wrong 
side of town whose family 
fell apart, in trouble with 
the police when I was a kid, 
unable to read and write, with 
no qualifications and, on top 
of that, dyslexic.’
Look at the list. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▼  LANGUAGE FOR EFFECT
ACTIVITY 3
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
Make notes on your answers to these questions. Discuss them with 
others if possible.
1 Why does Zephaniah think architects are important? What does he 
think about ‘beating the odds’?
2 How inspiring do you think other dyslexics would find this piece? Why?
3 Zephaniah thinks a pictorial written language style, such as the 
Chinese system – do you agree? Can you think of any other examples? 
Think about how a letter represents a thing, and representing a sound.
▼  LETTERS AS THINGS AND SOUNDS
ACTIVITY 4
SKILLS
COLLABORATION, EMPATHY, 
NEGOTIATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
128
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
AO2
How does the writer explore his early life and relationship with reading?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
How does the writer use language and structure to encourage the reader to 
challenge unfair treatment? 
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
1 A friend has been told that they are dyslexic. Write about what you 
would do to help and encourage them.
2 Someone in your class is being treated badly by a teacher. Write 
a story in which this classmate deals with the problem, not by 
becoming angry, but by thinking creatively.
▼   WRITING TASKS
ACTIVITY 5
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
129
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
This extract comes from a book which was written as a spin-off 
from Emma Levine’s television series about strange and unusual 
sports. It is a travelogue in which she describes these sports, the 
people involved and her experiences of filming them. In doing so, 
she gives an insight not just into the sports themselves, but into 
the lives and culture of the people who take part in and watch 
them.
A GAME OF POLO WITH A HEADLESS GOAT 
EMMA LEVINE
▶
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
travelogue a book that describes a travel 
experience
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Do some research.
 
◼
Find some information about Emma Levine. You can visit her 
website by searching for her name.
 
◼
Find a newspaper report on a motor race, perhaps a Formula 1 
Grand Prix, which many consider to be the top race in motorsport.
 
◼
What is the strangest sport or game you know or can find 
information about?
2 In a small group or with a partner, share your ideas on the following 
questions:
 
◼
Do you prefer to take part in sport or watch it?
 
◼
How important is sport in your life?
 
◼
Does the involvement of money in sport (for instance, gambling or 
excessive pay for sportspeople) ruin sport?
▼   FROM A GAME OF POLO WITH A HEADLESS GOAT  
BY EMMA LEVINE
We drove off to find the best viewing spot, which turned out to be the crest 
of the hill so we could see the approaching race. I asked the lads if we could 
join in the ‘Wacky Races’ and follow the donkeys, and they loved the idea. 
‘We’ll open the car boot, you climb inside and point your camera towards the 
race. As the donkeys overtake us, we’ll join the cars.’ ‘But will you try and get 
to the front?’ ‘Oh yes, that’s no problem.’
The two lads who had never been interested in this Karachi sport were 
suddenly fired up with enthusiasm. We waited for eternity on the brow of the 
hill, me perched in the boot with a zoom lens pointing out. Nearly one hour 
later I was beginning to feel rather silly when the only action was a villager on 
a wobbly bicycle, who nearly fell off as he cycled past and gazed around at us.
Several vehicles went past, and some donkey-carts carrying spectators. ‘Are 
they coming?’ we called out to them. ‘Coming, coming,’ came the reply. I was 
beginning to lose faith in its happening, but the lads remained confident.
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
130
Just as I was assuming that the race had been cancelled, we spotted two 
approaching donkey-carts in front of a cloud of fumes and dust created by 
some fifty vehicles roaring up in their wake. As they drew nearer, Yaqoob 
revved up the engine and began to inch the car out of the lay-by. The two 
donkeys were almost dwarfed by their entourage; but there was no denying 
their speed – the Kibla donkey is said to achieve speeds of up to 40 kph, and 
this looked close. The two were neck-and-neck, their jockeys perched on top 
of the tiny carts using their whips energetically, although not cruelly.
The noise of the approaching vehicles grew; horns tooting, bells ringing, and 
the special rattles used just for this purpose (like maracas, a metal container 
filled with dried beans). Men standing on top of their cars and vans, hanging 
out of taxis and perched on lorries, all cheered and shouted, while the 
vehicles jostled to get to the front of the convoy.
Yaqoob chose exactly the right moment to edge out of the road and swerve 
in front of the nearest car, finding the perfect place to see the two donkeys 
and at the front of the vehicles. This was Formula One without rules, or a 
city-centre rush hour gone anarchic; a complete flouting of every type of 
traffic rule and common sense.
Our young driver relished this unusual test of driving skills. It was survival 
of the fittest, and depended upon the ability to cut in front of a vehicle with 
a sharp flick of the steering wheel (no lane discipline here); quick reflexes to 
spot a gap in the traffic for a couple of seconds; nerves of steel, and an effective 
horn. There were two races – the motorized spectators at the back; in front, 
the two donkeys, still running close and amazingly not put off by the uproar 
just behind them. Ahead of the donkeys, oncoming traffic – for it was a main 
road – had to dive into the ditch and wait there until we had passed. Yaqoob 
loved it. We stayed near to the front, his hand permanently on the horn and his 
language growing more colourful with every vehicle that tried to cut in front.
The road straightened and levelled, and everyone picked up speed as we 
neared the end of the race. But just as they were reaching the finishing line, 
▶
anarchic Lawless.
flouting Breaking.
▲ Emma Levine writes about the ancient sports of Asia
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
131
Emma Levine’s purpose in writing her book was to describe and inform. She 
obviously has to engage the reader and hold their interest. As you study this 
text, you need to think about how she does this.
the hospital gate, there was a near pile-up as the leading donkey swerved, lost 
his footing and he and the cart tumbled over. The race was over.
And then the trouble began. I assumed the winner was the one who 
completed the race but it was not seen that way by everyone. Apart from the 
two jockeys and ‘officials’ (who, it turned out, were actually monitoring the 
race) there were over a hundred punters who had all staked money on the 
race, and therefore had strong opinions. Some were claiming that the donkey 
had fallen because the other one had been ridden too close to him. Voices 
were raised, fists were out and tempers rising. Everyone gathered around one 
jockey and official, while the bookmakers were trying to insist that the race 
should be re-run.
Yaqoob and Iqbal were nervous of hanging around a volatile situation. They 
agreed to find out for me what was happening, ordering me to stay inside 
the car as they were swallowed up by the crowd. They emerged sometime 
later. ‘It’s still not resolved,’ said Iqbal, ‘but it’s starting to get nasty. I think 
we should leave.’ As we drove away, Yaqoob reflected on his driving skills. 
‘I really enjoyed that,’ he said as we drove off at a more sedate pace. ‘But I 
don’t even have my licence yet because I’m underage!’
They both found this hilarious, but I was glad he hadn’t told me before; an 
inexperienced, underage driver causing a massive pile-up in the middle of the 
high-stakes donkey race could have caused problems.
▶
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
The passage seems a straightforward description and narrative of the 
race, but it isn’t. First of all, there is not just one race happening, but 
three:
 
◼
the donkey race
 
◼
the spectators’ race
 
◼
the writer’s race to get the best pictures.
Find one quotation for each of these in order to show that there are 
three races taking place.
 
▶ Is the main focus of the reader’s interest the race, or the people 
involved in it? What do you think? Find some evidence to support your 
point of view.
▼   THREE RACES
ACTIVITY 1
STRUCTURE
The passage can be defined as a series of linked paragraphs, describing 
events in chronological order and concluding with the end of the race and 
the writer’s overview of what happened. The internal structure is much more 
complex than this simple outline suggests.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
132
Copy and complete the following table, finding examples of each of 
the different kinds of writing used in the passage. How does each of 
the examples that you have found add to the reader’s interest in the 
passage?
▼  TYPE OF WRITING
▼  EXAMPLE(S)
Description
 
Dialogue
 
Informational writing
 
Narrative
 
Evaluation
 
Commentary
▼   TYPES OF WRITING
ACTIVITY 2
Most newspaper reports of sports races are serious in tone, and try to give the 
facts of the race and what it was like. Emma Levine’s purpose is much more 
complicated than that. This passage is a mixture of comic writing and serious 
reportage, with a lot of information given as well. Consider each of these 
elements carefully.
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION
KEY POINT
The subject matter of this passage 
lends itself to both comedy and drama 
and the writer exploits both to great 
effect.
IMAGE TO BE SOURCED
▲ caption copy to be supplied
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
133
Copy and complete the following table to help you understand how 
language is used.
▼ QUESTION 
▼ ANSWER AND EVIDENCE
What words and phrases does Levine use 
to bring out the humour of the race? 
 
 
 
1 ‘the “Wacky Races”’ – this 
reference to a famous television 
cartoon series puts the race in a 
comic context. 
2 
3
What words and 
phrases help 
to convey the 
excitement of the 
races? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Words that convey 
movement 
 
 
 
1 ‘some fifty vehicles roaring up 
in their wake’ – this conveys the 
speed of the cars and the speed of 
the donkeys. 
2 
3
Words that suggest 
sound 
1 
2 
3
Words that create 
visual images 
1 
2 
3
What words and phrases show that the 
passage contains some serious moments?
1 ‘Yaqoob and Iqbal were nervous 
of hanging around a volatile 
situation’ – this shows the danger 
of the situation and how quickly 
the mood of the spectators might 
change.
2
3
▼   LANGUAGE FOR EFFECT
ACTIVITY 3
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
KEY POINT
Sport, essentially showing adults 
playing games, is a fertile subject for 
writers.
SKILLS
REASONING, CREATIVITY,  
INNOVATION
SKILLS
INTERPERSONAL SKILLS
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS,
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
How does the writer use language and structure to create excitement and 
interest?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
1 Write a short story about a race or a hunt.
2 Write a newspaper report on a game involving a team sport, such as, 
football, cricket or basketball.
3 ‘Taking part in sport is more important than winning’. Argue either in 
favour of this statement or against it.
▼   WRITING TASKS
ACTIVITY 4
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
134
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Do some research about the history and geography of Bhutan.
2 In groups, talk about what makes your own culture different from that of 
other countries. Are there many differences, or only a few? Talk about 
the different things that we discuss when describing a culture, such as 
language, clothing and practices.
3 Quite often the names of countries and cities have very interesting 
stories behind their origin. Share any that you know with the rest of your 
class.
▼   FROM BEYOND THE SKY AND EARTH: A JOURNEY INTO 
BHUTAN BY JAMIE ZEPPA
Mountains all around, climbing up to peaks, rolling into valleys, again and 
again. Bhutan is all and only mountains. I know the technical explanation for 
the landscape, landmass meeting landmass, the Indian subcontinent colliding 
into Asia thirty or forty million years ago, but I cannot imagine it. It is easier 
to picture a giant child gathering earth in great armfuls, piling up rock, 
pinching mud into ridges and sharp peaks, knuckling out little valleys and 
gorges, poking holes for water to fall through.
It is my first night in Thimphu, the capital, a ninety-minute drive from the 
airport to Paro. It took five different flights over four days to get there, 
from Toronto to Montreal, Amsterdam to New Delhi, Calcutta to Paro. I 
am exhausted but I cannot sleep. From my simple, pine-panelled room at 
the DrukSherig hotel, I watch mountains, how the landscape resolved itself 
beyond the immediate wall in front of you. Flying in from the baked-brown 
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Jamie Zeppa is a Canadian writer and college professor. Beyond 
the Sky and Earth: A Journey into Bhutan is an autobiography that 
recounts her experiences on a two-year assignment as an English 
lecturer in the 1980s in the mountainous kingdom of Bhutan. It is 
a memoir, but it should also be classed as travel writing. It is a 
record of the culture and life of a Himalayan village and her initial 
reactions and growing attachment to this remote and unexplored 
part of the world. 
Bhutan is a landlocked country in South Asia and was not 
exposed to western influences until the second half of the 20th 
century, which enabled it to retain much of its unique identity and 
charm. It is a country that has been named the happiest in Asia 
and the eighth happiest in the world.
BEYOND THE SKY AND EARTH: A JOURNEY  
INTO BHUTAN  
JAMIE ZEPPA
▶
▶
Paro A valley in Bhutan that contains the 
country’s only international airport.
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
memoir a form of autobiography
landlocked without a coastline 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
135
plains of India this morning, I found out: on the other side of mountains are 
mountains, more mountains and more mountains again. The entire earth 
below us was a convulsion of crests and gorges and winding sharpened 
pinnacles. Just past Everest, I caught a glimpse of the Tibetan plateau, the 
edge of a frozen desert 4,500 meters above sea level. Thimphu’s altitude is 
about half of that but even here, the winter air is thin and dry and very cold.
The next morning, I share breakfast of instant coffee, powdered milk, 
plasticky white bread and flavourless red jam in the hotel with two other 
Canadians who have signed to teach in Bhutan for two years. Lorna 
has golden brown hair, freckles and a no nonsense, home-on-the-farm 
demeanour that is frequently shattered by her ringing laughter and stories of 
wild characters that populate her life in Saskatchewan. Sasha from British 
Columbia is slight and dark, with an impish smile. After breakfast, we have 
a brief meeting with Gordon, the field director of the WUSC program in 
Bhutan, and then walk along the main road of Thimpu. Both Lorna and 
Sasha have travelled extensively; Lorna trekked all over Europe and North 
Africa and Sasha worked for a year in an orphanage in Bombay. They are 
both ecstatic about Bhutan so far, and I stay close to them, hoping to pick up 
some of their enthusiasm.
Although Thimphu’s official population is 20,000, it seems even smaller. 
It doesn’t even have traffic lights. Blue-suited policemen stationed at two 
intersections along the main road steer the occasional truck or land cruiser 
using incomprehensible but grateful hand gestures. The buildings all have 
the same pitched roof, refoil windows and heavy beams painted with lotus 
flowers, jewels and clouds. One-storied shops with wooden-shuttered 
windows open onto the street. They seem to be selling the same things: 
onions, rice, milk powder, dried fish, plastic buckets and metal plates, quilts 
and packages of stale, soft cookies from India-Bourbon Biscuits, Coconut 
Crunchies and the hideously colored Orange Cream Biscuits. There are more 
signs of the outside world that I had expected: teenagers in acid washed 
jeans Willie Nelson’s greatest hits after the news in English on the Bhutan 
Broadcasting Service, a Rambo poster in a bar. Overall, these signs of cultural 
infiltration are few, but they are startling against the Bhutanese-ness of 
everything else.
The town itself looks very old, with cracked sidewalks and faded paintwork 
but Gordon told us that it didn’t exist thirty-odd years ago. Before the sixties, 
when the third king decided to make it the capital, it was nothing but rice 
paddies, a few farm houses and a dzong – one of the fortresses that are 
scattered throughout the country. Thimphu is actually new. ‘Thimphu will 
look like New York to you when you come back after a year in the east,’ he 
said.
At the end of the main road is Tashichho Dzong, the seat of the royal 
government in Bhutan, a grand, white washed, red-roofed, golden tipped 
fortress, built in the traditional way, without any blueprints or nails. Beyond, 
hamlets are connected by footpaths, and terraced fields, barren now climb 
steadily from the river and merge into forest. Thimphu will never look like 
New York to me, I think.
The Bhutanese are a very handsome, ‘the best built race of men I ever saw,’ 
wrote emissary George Bogle on his way to Tibet in 1774, and I find I agree. 
Of medium height and sturdily built, but they have beautiful aristocratic 
faces with dark almond shaped eyes, high cheekbones and gentle smiles. 
▶
Saskatchewan A province in Canada 
known for its harsh winters.
British Columbia A Canadian province  
on the west coast, containing the city of 
Vancouver.
impish Mischievous; the term comes from 
a mythological creature believed to cause 
trouble.
WUSC World University Service of Canada, 
a non-profit organisation that works with 
local bodies to strengthen educational 
systems and economic opportunities.
Willie Nelson A well-known American 
musician of country music whose career was 
at its height in the 1970s. 
Rambo The American main character from 
the Rambo films.
dzong A type of fortress found in the 
present and former Tibetan Buddhist 
kingdoms of the Himalayas, particularly 
Bhutan and south Tibet.
emissary A diplomat or representative for 
a country.
George Bogle A Scottish traveller and 
diplomat who was the first to establish 
diplomatic relations with Tibet.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
136
Both men and women wear their black hair short. The women wear a kira, 
a brightly striped, ankle-length dress and the men a gho, a knee-length robe 
that resembles a kimono, except the top part is exceptionally voluminous. 
The Bhutanese of Nepali origin tend to be taller, with sharper features and 
darker complexions. They too wear a gho and a kira. People look at us 
curiously, but do not seem surprised by our presence. Although we see few 
other foreigners in town, we know they are here. Gordon said something this 
morning about Thimphu’s small but friendly ‘expat’ community.
When we stop and ask for directions at a hotel, the young man behind the 
counter walks with us to the street, pointing out the way, explaining politely 
with impeccable English. I search for the right word to describe the people, 
for the quality that impresses me the most – dignity, unselfconsciousness, 
good humor, grace – but can find no single word to hold all of my 
impressions.
In Thimpu, we attended a week-long orientation session with twelve other 
Irish, British, Australian and New Zealand teachers new to Bhutan. Our first 
class lessons, in Bhutanese history, are the most interesting. Historical records 
show that waves of Tibetan immigrants settled in Bhutan sometime before 
the 10th century, but the area is thought to have been inhabited long before 
that. In the eighth century, the Indian saint Padmasambhava brought to the 
area, where it absorbed many elements of Bon, the indigenous shamanistic 
religion. The New religion took hold but was not a unifying force. The area 
remained a collection of isolated valleys, each ruled by its own king. When 
the Tibetan lama, Ngawang Namgyel, arrived in 1616, he set about unifying 
the valleys under one central authority and gave the country the name Druk 
Yul, meaning Land of the Thunder Dragon. Earlier names for Bhutan are 
just as beautiful – the Tibetans knew the country as the Southern Land 
of Medicinal Herbs and the South Sandalwood Country. Districts within 
Bhutan were even more felicitously-named: Rainbow Districts of Desires, 
Lotus Grove of the Gods, Blooming Valley of Luxuriant Fruits and the Land 
of Longing and Silver Pines. Bhutan, the name by which the country came 
to be known to the outside world, is thought to be derived from Bhotanta, 
meaning the ‘end of Tibet’ or from the Sanskrit Bhu-uttan, meaning 
‘highlands’.
While the rest of Asia was being overrun by Europeans of varying hue but 
similar cry, only a handful of Westerners found their way into Bhutan. Two 
Portuguese Jesuits came to call in 1627, and six British missions paid brief 
but cordial visits from the late 1700s until the middle of the next century. 
Relations with the British took a nasty turn during the disastrous visit of 
Ashley Eden in 1864. Eden, who had gone to sort out a small problem of 
the Bhutanese raids on the British territory, had his back slapped, his hair 
pulled, and his face rubbed with wet dough, and was then forced to sign 
an outrageous treaty that led to a brief war between the British and the 
Bhutanese. Considering the consolidated British Empire in the south and 
the Great Game being played out in the north between the colonial powers, 
Bhutan’s preservation of its independence was remarkable. I am full of 
admiration for this small country that has managed to look after itself so 
well.
Padmasambhava An Indian Buddhist 
master.
Shamanistic religion A religion that has a 
belief in natural phenomenon and in powerful 
spirits that can be influenced by shamans (a 
person who acts as an intermediary between 
natural and supernatural worlds).
lama A Buddhist monk from Tibet or 
Mongolia.
sandalwood A tree grown for its fragrant 
wood and oil in the Indian subcontinent. 
felicitously Pleasingly or well-chosen.
Sanskrit An ancient Indian language.
Jesuits Members of a Roman Catholic order 
devoted to missionary work.
cordial Friendly and polite.
Ashley Eden An official and diplomat in 
India under British rule.
Great Game The economic and political 
conflict between the British Empire and the 
Russian Empire for supremacy in Central 
Asia in the 19th century.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
137
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
This extract gives the reader a vivid description of the writer’s first impressions 
of a foreign land. It conveys the way in which the writer’s reaction changes 
from an initial lukewarm attitude to a gradual fascination as she begins to learn 
about the country’s history and observe its culture.
Travel writing refers to personal accounts of explorations and travel 
experiences. This genre contains many factual details. Terms that are specific 
to that culture are explained and opinions are conveyed. Like most travel 
writing, this extract describes a key event and includes background details and 
research that was most likely conducted after the travel experience has ended. 
Because this is a memoir, we learn about Bhutan through the eyes of the narrator, and it conveys her mixed 
feelings effectively. While the text is full of information intended to give the reader a sense of place, it is also her 
personal view of Bhutan and everything that she sees and experiences.
Copy and complete the following table, making a list of the writer’s feelings, giving an example and explaining their 
effect.
▼ FEELING/ATTITUDE
▼ EXAMPLE 
▼ COMMENT
A sense of being unable to 
understand the experience. 
 
‘... but I cannot imagine it’ 
 
 
The writer seems unable to even understand 
the geography of the area, as if it is so 
different from what she is used to that she 
needs to visualise it in different ways.
A lack of enthusiasm for 
the country.
  
 
 
 
 
‘teenagers in acid washed jeans, Willie 
Nelson’s greatest hits after the news in English 
on the Bhutan Broadcasting Service...’
 
 
▼   LANGUAGE FOR EFFECT
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
Copy and complete the following table, finding examples of these 
features of travel writing in the passage.
▼ FEATURE
▼ EXAMPLE
Central event
 
Factual details
 
Background details
 
Terminology and explanation
 
Opinions
 
Evidence of research 
▼   FEATURES OF TRAVEL WRITING
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
138
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
In this extract, Jamie Zeppa is both an observer and a participant. She is 
looking at and reflecting on the elements of culture that she sees around her, 
but she is also beginning to participate by attending the training session as 
part of her work as a lecturer. These aspects are reflected in the language 
choices she makes.
This is mainly an informative piece full of factual information. If it is too full of 
facts, the reader might find it boring or dry. However, Zeppa is able to make 
it lively and capture the reader’s attention. One reason for this is her love for 
the place. Another reason is her skilled use of techniques and the language 
choices she makes.
 
▶ In the second paragraph, find two phrases that show that the writer is 
observing her surroundings.
 
▶ Look at paragraph three and explain in your own words what the writer 
thinks about Thimphu.
▲ The mountains of Paro, Bhutan
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
139
Copy and complete the following table, thinking about the techniques 
used in the extract and their effect on the reader. 
▼ TECHNIQUE
▼ EXAMPLE
▼ EFFECT
Repetition
 
 
Hyphenated words
 
 
Imagery
 
 
Original phrases
 
 
Now copy and complete the next table, picking out some words or 
phrases that Zeppa uses to make her text feel lively and to add vivid 
detail.
▼ WORDS OR PHRASES
▼ COMMENT
‘Hideously coloured 
Orange Cream Biscuits’ 
 
 
A small amount of humour is added by this 
phrase. It also creates a picture in the reader’s 
mind of the brightness of the food dye used and 
creates an impression that the writer finds some 
aspects of what she sees very different from home.
 
 
 
 
The writer uses lists extensively as a technique. This is particularly 
useful because she is describing the varied and fascinating world that 
she is being exposed to. Lists can be of two types:
1 syndetic lists – a list connected by the use of conjunctions between 
each term, for example, ‘apples and oranges and grapes’
2 asyndectic lists – a list connected by commas, for example, 
‘umbrellas, shoes, prams and all sorts of things’. At times, even 
the final conjunction ‘and’ can be omitted, for example, ‘articles, 
adjectives, nouns, phrases, clauses, verbs... the list was endless’. 
Copy and complete the following table, finding an example of each type 
of list in the passage and explaining why it might have been used.
▼ TYPE
▼ EXAMPLE
▼ EFFECT
Syndetic 
 
 
Asyndetic 
 
 
▼  TECHNIQUES FOR EFFECT
ACTIVITY 3
KEY POINT
Look at the ways in which the writer 
uses language to perform the dual 
roles of observer and participant.
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
140
▲ “A place different from any I had known”
How does the writer use language and structure to convey her growing 
fascination with Bhutan?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
AO2
1 Give a speech on the topic, ‘The ten things I need in order to be happy’. 
When planning, think of all the little things as well as the important things 
that you should have in your list. Try to add one item or idea that is really 
different from other people’s, as this can be used to comic effect.
2 In pairs, create the text for a radio commercial advertising an exotic 
or interesting place to visit, then perform it for the class.
▼   TEN THINGS I NEED ...
ACTIVITY 4
SKILLS
TEAMWORK, SELF-PRESENTATION
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
1 Write an article for your school newspaper persuading senior 
students to take a gap year after their final examinations. During this 
year, they should provide some service to the community before 
beginning their university education. How will you convince them to 
do so?
2 Look at the following images. Write a narrative beginning with the 
words, ‘I wanted to get away to a place that that was different from 
any that I had known until now’.
▼   WRITING TASKS
ACTIVITY 5
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
141
BEFORE YOU START READING 
1 Find out what you can about goshawks and what makes them different 
from other birds of prey.
2 Find some pictures of hawks on the internet. Try to think of some words 
or phrases to describe them and their apparent ‘personalities’.
3 What is hawking? What do you think might be the rewards of training a 
goshawk with which to go hawking? 
▼   FROM H IS FOR HAWK BY HELEN MACDONALD
‘We’ll check the ring numbers against the Article 10s,’ he explained, 
pulling a sheaf of yellow paper from his rucksack and unfolding 
two of the official forms that accompany captive-bred rare birds 
throughout their lives. ‘Don’t want you going home with the wrong 
bird.’
We noted the numbers. We stared down at the boxes, at their parcel-
tape handles, their doors of thin plywood and hinges of carefully tied 
string. Then he knelt on the concrete, untied a hinge on the smaller 
box and squinted into its dark interior. A sudden thump of feathered 
shoulders and the box shook as if someone had punched it, hard, 
from within. ‘She’s got her hood off,’ he said, and frowned. That light, 
leather hood was to keep the hawk from fearful sights. Like us.
Another hinge untied. Concentration. Infinite caution. Daylight 
irrigating the box. Scratching talons, another thump. And another. 
Thump. The air turned syrupy, slow, flecked with dust. The last few 
seconds before a battle. And with the last bow pulled free, he reached 
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Helen Macdonald is a very experienced and enthusiastic falconer. 
When her father died suddenly on a London street, she was 
devastated. In an attempt to cope with her grief, she decided to 
buy and train one of the most difficult and aggressive of birds of 
prey, the goshawk. She wanted to absorb herself with the bird 
that she would be able to forget her grief. The whole experience 
changed her life, leading to the writing of a book about the 
process. She said: ‘The book is a memoir about that year when I 
lost my father and trained a hawk’. 
Macdonald’s book, published in 2013, won the Samuel Johnson 
Prize and Costa Book of the Year Award (both highly prestigious 
awards in the UK and Ireland). One reviewer, Mark Cocker, said: 
‘More than any other writer I know, Macdonald is able to summon 
the mental world of a bird of prey… As a naturalist she has 
somehow acquired her bird’s laser-like visual acuity’. In addition, 
he praised her writing for its verbal inventiveness and precision.
H IS FOR HAWK 
HELEN MACDONALD 
▶
▶
 
 
 
 
5
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
15
Article 10s Certificates required for rare or 
endangered species sold in the UK.
GENERAL VOCABULARY
summon make something clear for the 
reader
acuity ability
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
142
inside, and amidst a whirring, chaotic clatter of wings and feet and 
talons and a high-pitched twittering and it’s all happening at once, 
the man pulls an enormous, enormous hawk out of the box and in 
a strange coincidence of world and deed a great flood of sunlight 
drenches us and everything is brilliance and fury. The hawk’s wings, 
barred and beating, the sharp fingers of her dark-tipped primaries 
cutting the air, her feathers raised like the scattered quills of a fretful 
porpentine. Two enormous eyes. My heart jumps sideways. She is a 
conjuring trick. A reptile. A fallen angel. A griffon from the pages of 
an illuminated bestiary. Something bright and distant, like gold falling 
through water. A broken marionette of wings, legs and light-splashed 
feathers. She is wearing jesses, and the man holds them. For one awful, 
long moment she is hanging head-downward, wings open, like a 
turkey in a butcher’s shop, only her head is turned right-way-up and 
she is seeing more than she has ever seen before in her whole short life. 
Her world was an aviary no larger than a living room. Then it was a 
box. But now it is this; and she can see everything: the point-source 
glitter on the waves, a diving cormorant a hundred yards out; pigment 
flakes under wax on the lines of parked cars; far hills and the heather 
on them and miles and miles of sky where the sun spreads on dust and 
water and illegible things moving in it that are white scraps of gulls. 
Everything startling and new-stamped on her entirely astonished brain.
Through all this the man was perfectly calm. He gathered up the 
hawk in one practised movement, folding her wings, anchoring her 
broad feathered back against his chest, gripping her scaled yellow legs 
in one hand. ‘Let’s get that hood back on,’ he said tautly. There was 
concern in his face. It was born of care. This hawk had been hatched 
in an incubator, had broken from a frail bluish eggshell into a humid 
perspex box, and for the first few days of her life this man had fed her 
with scraps of meat held in a pair of tweezers, waiting patiently for the 
lumpen, fluffy chick to notice the food and eat, her new neck wobbling 
with the effort of keeping her head in the air. All at once I loved this 
man, and fiercely. I grabbed the hood from the box and turned to the 
hawk. Her beak was open, her hackles raised; her wild eyes were the 
colour of sun on white paper, and they stared because the whole world 
had fallen into them at once. One, two, three. I tucked the hood over 
her head. There was a brief intimation of a thin, angular skull under 
her feathers, of an alien brain fizzing and fusing with terror, then I 
drew the braces closed. We checked the ring numbers against the form.
It was the wrong bird. This was the younger one. The smaller one. This 
was not my hawk.
Oh.
So we put her back and opened the other box, which was meant to 
hold the larger, older bird. And dear God, it did. Everything about this 
second hawk was different. She came out like a Victorian melodrama: 
a sort of madwoman in the attack. She was smokier and darker and 
much, much bigger, and instead of twittering, she wailed; great, awful 
gouts of sound like a thing in pain, and the sound was unbearable. 
This is my hawk, I was telling myself and it was all I could do to 
breathe. She too was bareheaded, and I grabbed the hood from the 
box as before. But as I brought it up to her face I looked into her eyes 
and saw something blank and crazy in her stare. Some madness from 
▶
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
55
 
 
60 
 
 
 
 
65 
 
 
 
primaries Large feathers at the ends of the 
wings.
fretful porpentine A defensive porcupine 
(the phrase is borrowed from Shakespeare’s 
Hamlet).
illuminated bestiary A beautifully 
illustrated medieval book about mythical and 
other animals.
marionette A puppet worked by strings.
jesses Short leather straps fastened to the 
legs.
point-source glitter Glitter made up of 
many points of light.
tautly Tensely, tightly.
hackles Small feathers at the back of the 
neck.
▲ The goshawk, an aggressive bird of prey
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
143
a distant country. I didn’t recognise her. This isn’t my hawk. The hood 
was on, the ring numbers checked, the bird back in the box, the yellow 
form folded, the money exchanged, and all I could think was, But 
this isn’t my hawk. Slow panic. I knew what I had to say, and it was a 
monstrous breach of etiquette. ‘This is really awkward,’ I began. ‘But I 
really liked the first one. Do you think there’s any chance I could take 
that one instead… ?’ I tailed off. His eyebrows were raised. I started 
again, saying stupider things: ‘I’m sure the other falconer would like 
the larger bird? She’s more beautiful than the first one, isn’t she? I 
know this is out of order, but I… Could I? Would it be all right, do 
you think?’ And on and on, a desperate, crazy barrage of incoherent 
appeals.
I’m sure nothing I said persuaded him more than the look on my face 
as I said it. A tall, white-faced woman with wind-wrecked hair and 
exhausted eyes was pleading with him on a quayside, hands held out 
as if she were in a seaside production of Medea. Looking at me he 
must have sensed that my stuttered request wasn’t a simple one. That 
there was something behind it that was very important. There was a 
moment of total silence.
This extract from the book describes the moment when Macdonald first meets 
the hawk she has decided to train. It is a moment of great significance – the 
relationship that she builds with this bird is the main topic of the book and is 
the method that she adopts for dealing with her grief for her father. 
Although the second hawk that is pulled out is the one that she has reserved 
for herself, Macdonald makes a very quick decision on instinct. There is 
something she does not like about the larger bird and she decides to ask for 
the one that the man brought out first. She describes both birds in detail.
This kind of writing is sometimes called ‘creative non-fiction’. This is because, 
although it is factual, it is also imaginative and highly-crafted writing. When 
you re-read the extract, look out for the same kinds of writing that you get in 
fiction – description, narrative, dialogue, thoughts and feelings, as well as more 
fact-based explanation.
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT 
Much of the success of creative non-fiction is in the detail. Copy and complete the following table, 
examining details from the extract and considering what they tell the reader. 
▼ LINES
▼ DETAILS
▼ WHAT DOES THIS TELL THE READER?
7–8 
‘a sudden thump… as if someone had punched 
it, hard, from within’
The bird is powerful and aggressive. 
 
 
‘…in one practised movement, folding her 
wings, anchoring her broad feathered back 
against his chest…’
 
 
 
‘Her beak was open, her hackles raised; her wild 
eyes were the colour of sun on white paper…’
 
▼  EXAMINING THE DETAIL
ACTIVITY 1
AO1
 
70 
 
 
 
 
75 
 
 
 
 
80
 
 
 
 
85 
Medea Greek revenge tragedy about a 
woman with magical powers.
KEY POINT
Non-fiction can incorporate elements 
more associated with fiction, such as 
creative use of narrative.
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
144
AO1
Copy and complete the following table, thinking carefully about the themes of the extract. Think of 
some more themes that you noticed in the extract.
▼ THEME 
▼ EXAMPLE
▼ COMMENT
Beauty of the bird 
24–26: ‘She is a conjuring trick… a 
fallen angel… like gold…’
Macdonald is completely fascinated, 
almost overwhelmed, by the bird.
Fierce personality of the bird 
 
 
Emotional reaction 
 
 
 
▼  THEMES
ACTIVITY 2
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
The language of this passage is inventive and intense. It is clear that the writer 
was concentrating hard on communicating as vividly as possible an experience 
that was important in her life and in the story that she is telling. We can see this 
in a number of ways such as in the precision of the vocabulary, the originality of 
the imagery (the figurative language); and the variety of sentence structures. 
Mark Cocker wrote that Macdonald ‘combines a lexicographer’s pleasure in 
words as carefully curated objects with an inventive passion for words or for 
ways of releasing fresh effects from the old stock’. Can you see why he said this?
Copy and complete the following table, finding examples of the different linguistic techniques and devices and con-
sidering the effect that they create. Then identify some more linguistic techniques, quotations and effects for yourself.
▼  LINGUISTIC TECHNIQUES OR DEVICES
▼ QUOTATION
▼  EFFECT CREATED
Lists 
‘glitter on the waves, a diving 
cormorant…’ 
This makes us understand in detail the 
range and precision of the bird’s vision.
Similes  
 
 
Metaphors 
 
 
Short incomplete sentences 
 
 
▼  LANGUAGE FOR EFFECT
ACTIVITY 3
GENERAL VOCABULARY
lexicographer writer of dictionaries
curated objects objects in a museum
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING,  
ANALYSIS,  
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
145
STRUCTURE
To understand the structure of the extract, you can either look at the content 
of each of the eight paragraphs or think of it as being composed of a smaller 
number of sections. 
Copy and complete the following table, dividing the extract into four or 
five sections as you think appropriate.
▼ SECTIONS 
▼  WHAT THE SECTION IS ABOUT 
(CONTENT)
First section: Line _____ to line _____. 
[Hint: Think about which paragraph 
shifts into a different stage in the 
account. Where does the hawk 
actually appear?]
 
 
 
Second section: Line _____  
to line _____.  
[Hint: Is the focus always on the bird 
itself?]
Third section: Line _____  
to line _____. 
 
  
  
 
▶ You know that the content is structured. What does this structure help 
to achieve?
▼  UNDERSTANDING THE STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY 4
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
KEY POINT
One of the most individual aspects 
of creative non-fiction is the extent 
to which the author uses figurative 
language.
Macdonald is clearly excited about seeing the hawk: you can tell this by the way 
she exaggerates, saying that the hawk is ‘enormous, enormous’. 
EXTRACTS FROM SAMPLE RESPONSES TO THE EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
If this is typical of the whole response, it would justify a Level 2 mark with the 
following comments. 
 
◼
Some understanding of and comment on language and structure and how 
these are used by writers to achieve effects, including use of vocabulary. 
 
◼
The selection of references is valid, but not developed. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
146
Macdonald creates excitement through a range of linguistic techniques. Her 
language is emotive and figurative, creating a forceful effect. For example, 
in the lines beginning, ‘the man pulls an enormous, enormous hawk… ‘the 
words ‘brilliance and fury’ express her strong feelings while the repetition of 
‘enormous’ shows she is surprised.
If this is typical of the whole response, it would justify a Level X mark with the 
following comment. 
 
◼
Clear understanding and explanation of language and how it is used to 
achieve effects, including use of vocabulary and sentence structure. 
How does the writer use language and structure to portray the birds and 
setting?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(12 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
AO2
How does the writer create a sense of excitement? 
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
AO2
1 Making personal relationships with animals is the only way we can 
understand their nature.’ Write a magazine article giving your views 
on this statement. The article may include:
 
◼
the advantages and disadvantages of such relationships
 
◼
any other points you wish to make. 
Your response will be marked for the accurate and appropriate use of 
vocabulary, as well as accuracy of spelling and grammar.
2 How does the writer present the character of the hawks in the 
passage from H is for Hawk?
You should write about:
 
◼
the description of their appearance
 
◼
the way they behave
 
◼
the writer’s use of language and techniques to convey these.
You should refer closely to the text to support your answer. You may 
use brief quotations. 
▼  WRITING TASKS
ACTIVITY 5
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING, INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
147
▼   FROM CHINESE CINDERELLA BY ADELINE YEN MAH
Time went by relentlessly and it was Saturday again. Eight weeks more and it 
would be the end of term… in my case perhaps the end of school forever.
Four of us were playing Monopoly. My heart was not in it and I was losing 
steadily. Outside it was hot and there was a warm wind blowing. The radio 
warned of a possible typhoon the next day. It was my turn and I threw the 
dice. As I played, the thought of leaving school throbbed at the back of my 
mind like a persistent toothache.
‘Adeline!’ Ma-mien Valentino was calling.
‘You can’t go now,’ Mary protested. ‘For once I’m winning. One, two, three, 
four. Good! You’ve landed on my property. Thirty-five dollars, please. Oh, 
good afternoon, Mother Valentino!’
We all stood up and greeted her.
‘Adeline, didn’t you hear me call you? Hurry up downstairs! Your chauffeur 
is waiting to take you home!’
Full of foreboding, I ran downstairs as in a nightmare, wondering who had 
died this time. Father’s chauffeur assured me everyone was healthy.
‘Then why are you taking me home?’ I asked.
‘How should I know?’ he answered defensively, shrugging his shoulders. 
‘Your guess is as good as mine. They give the orders and I carry them out.’
During the short drive home, my heart was full of dread and I wondered 
what I had done wrong. Our car stopped at an elegant villa at mid-level, 
halfway up the hill between the peak and the harbour.
‘Where are we?’ I asked foolishly.
‘Don’t you know anything?’ the chauffeur replied rudely. ‘This is your new 
home. Your parents moved here a few months ago.’
‘I had forgotten,’ I said as I got out.
Ah Gum opened the door. Inside, it was quiet and cool.
‘Where is everyone?’
‘Your mother is out playing bridge. Your two brothers and Little Sister are 
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Chinese Cinderella is an autobiography by Adeline Yen Mah in 
which she describes growing up in a wealthy family in Hong Kong 
in the 1950s. She is rejected by her stepmother and her father is 
a distant, though powerful, character. She spends much of her 
time at boarding school.
CHINESE CINDERELLA
ADELINE YEN MAH
▶
▶
typhoon A storm in the Indian or Western 
Pacific Oceans.
bridge A card game played with four 
people.
▲  Chinese-American author and physician 
Adeline Yen Mah
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
148
sunbathing by the swimming pool. Your father is in his room and wants to 
see you as soon as you get home.’
‘See me in his room?’ I was overwhelmed by the thought that I had been 
summoned by Father to enter the Holy of Holies – a place to which I had 
never been invited. Why?
Timidly, I knocked on the door. Father was alone, looking relaxed in his 
slippers and bathrobe, reading a newspaper. He smiled as I entered and I saw 
he was in a happy mood. I breathed a small sigh of relief at first but became 
uneasy when I wondered why he was being so nice, thinking, Is this a giant 
ruse on his part to trick me? Dare I let my guard down?
‘Sit down! Sit down!’ He pointed to a chair. ‘Don’t look so scared. Here, take 
a look at this! They’re writing about someone we both know, I think.’
He handed me the day’s newspaper and there, in one corner, I saw my name 
ADELINE YEN in capital letters prominently displayed.
‘It was announced today that 14-year-old Hong Kong schoolgirl ADELINE 
JUN-LING YEN of Sacred Heart Canossian School, Caine Road, Hong 
Kong, has won first prize in the International Play-writing Competition held 
in London, England, for the 1951–1952 school year. It is the first time that 
any local Chinese student from Hong Kong has won such a prestigious event. 
Besides a medal, the prize comes with a cash reward of FIFTY ENGLISH 
POUNDS. Our sincere congratulations, ADELINE YEN, for bringing honour 
to Hong Kong. We are proud of you.’
Is it possible? Am I dreaming? Me, the winner?
‘I was going up the lift this morning with my friend C.Y. Tung when he 
showed me this article and asked me, “Is the winner Adeline Jun-ling Yen 
related to you? The two of you have the same uncommon last name.” Now 
C.Y. himself has a few children about your age but so far none of them has 
won an international literary prize, as far as I know. So I was quite pleased to 
tell him you are my daughter. Well done!’
He looked radiant. For once, he was proud of me. In front of his revered 
colleague, C.Y. Tung, a prominent fellow businessman also from Shanghai, 
I had given him face. I thought, Is this the big moment I have been waiting 
for? My whole being vibrated with all the joy in the world. I only had to 
stretch out my hand to reach the stars.
‘Tell me, how did you do it?’ he continued. ‘How come you won?’
‘Well, the rules and regulations were so very complicated. One really has to 
be dedicated just to understand what they want. Perhaps I was the only one 
determined enough to enter and there were no other competitors!’
He laughed approvingly. ‘I doubt it very much but that’s a good answer.’
‘Please, Father,’ I asked boldly, thinking it was now or never. ‘May I go to 
university in England too, just like my brothers?’
‘I do believe you have potential. Tell me, what would you study?’
My heart gave a giant lurch as it dawned on me that he was agreeing to let 
me go. How marvellous it was simply to be alive! Study? I thought. Going to 
England is like entering heaven. Does it matter what you do after you get to 
heaven?
▶
face In this context, a positive successful 
appearance in the eyes of other people. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
149
But Father was expecting an answer. What about creative writing? After all, I 
had just won first prize in an international writing competition!
‘I plan to study literature. I’ll be a writer.’
‘Writer!’ he scoffed. ‘You are going to starve! What language are you going 
to write in and who is going to read your writing? Though you may think 
you’re an expert in both Chinese and English, your Chinese is actually rather 
elementary. As for your English, don’t you think the native English speakers 
can write better than you?’
I waited in silence. I did not wish to contradict him.
‘You will go to England with Third Brother this summer and you will go to 
medical school. After you graduate, you will specialise in obstetrics. Women 
will always be having babies. Women patients prefer women doctors. You 
will learn to deliver their babies. That’s a foolproof profession for you. Don’t 
you agree?’
Agree? Of course I agreed. Apparently, he had it all planned out. As long as he 
let me go to university in England, I would study anything he wished. How did 
that line go in Wordsworth’s poem? Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive.
‘Father, I shall go to medical school in England and become a doctor. Thank 
you very, very much.’
AFTER YOU HAVE FINISHED READING
1 Do some research.
 
◼
You might want to look want to look up Adeline Yen Mah on the 
internet.
 
◼
Can you find other examples of childhood autobiographies?
Adeline Yen Mah writes to inform, explain and describe. She is writing for a 
general audience which may be interested in childhood memoirs, or perhaps 
in understanding the culture that Yen Mah comes from. Yen Mah writes in 
such a way that we can understand not only what is happening, but also the 
emotional impact of each incident in the passage.
The key to understanding the piece is to understand Adeline and her thoughts 
and feelings about boarding school and her ambition to travel to England. 
Most important of all is her relationship with her father.
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
obstetrics Caring for women who are 
having babies.
Wordsworth A Romantic poet who wrote 
during the 18th and 19th centuries.
In a small group or with a partner, discuss the following questions.
 
▶ Do you think that adults always remember the incidents of their 
childhood accurately? Do you think that this matters when reading 
a book like Chinese Cinderella?
 
▶ Some critics think that characters in Chinese Cinderella are either 
all good or all bad, and that very few of the characters are realistic. 
What do you think of this point of view?
▼  CHILDHOOD AUTOBIOGRAPHIES
ACTIVITY 1
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
150
Copy and complete the following table, finding evidence in the extract for Adeline’s feelings.
▼  ADELINE’S FEELINGS BEFORE SHE MEETS HER 
FATHER
▼  EVIDENCE
Her first reaction on hearing that he wants to see her.
She is overwhelmed.
She suggests her father’s room is somewhere uniquely special, 
a place to be revered, an inner sanctum to which few, if any, 
are admitted.
1 The Holy of Holies. 
2 A place to which I had never been invited. 
3
Her feelings on entering her father’s room.
1 She knocks timidly.
2
3
▼  ADELINE’S FEELINGS AS SHE MEETS HER FATHER
▼  EVIDENCE
He is commanding, as indicated by the repetition and use of 
exclamation. 
1 Use of exclamation marks 
2 He orders her to ‘Sit down!’ and repeats it. 
3
He is reassuring. 
 
1 
2 
3
Their relationship lacks warmth and closeness. 
 
1 
2 
3
He appears to be relaxed and at ease, in contrast to her 
tension. 
1 
2 
3
She is desperate to please her father and her reaction to his 
pleasure is overwhelming. 
1 
2 
3
She emphasises her shyness. 
 
1 
2 
3
She emphasises that she is wary of him.
1
2
3
▼  ANALYSING EMOTIONS
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: NON-FICTION
151
Like all writers, Adeline Yen Mah uses certain effects in order to create a 
response in the reader. Copy and complete the following table, explaining the 
effect(s) that you think she was trying to achieve with each technique.
▼  TECHNIQUE 
▼  INTENDED EFFECT
Moves into the present tense. 
Emphasises her lack of confidence and 
how worried she was.
Use of repetition by her father. 
Indicates either impatience or vigour. 
Use of punctuation and short sentences. 
Develops the reader’s understanding of 
character.
Use of triple rhetorical questions all 
written in the present tense. 
 
 
Use of cliché. 
 
 
 
Use of numbers rather than names for 
children. 
 
 
The passage starts in the past tense, moves 
through the present tense and ends with 
the past tense.
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
KEY POINT
Writers are highly skilled at  using 
language to achieve particular 
psychological responses in the reader. 
Try to become aware of your own 
responses when reading to understand 
what the writer is doing.
How does the writer use language and structure to convey her emotions?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, 
ANALYSIS, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
AO2
WRITING TASKS
1 Consider the following two statements. Write an argument in favour of one 
of these statements.
‘Boarding schools teach young people to become confident and well-
rounded adults.’
‘Sending young children away to boarding school is cruel and unnatural.’
2 Describe your hopes and dreams for your future and how you would feel if 
someone made your dreams come true.
SKILLS
REASONING, CREATIVITY,  
INNOVATION
GENERAL VOCABULARY
cliché An overused, unoriginal phrase or 
saying.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
152
When you read an unseen text for the first time you should TAP it! 
 
◼
Type: What type of text is it?
 
◼
Audience: Who is the intended audience? How do you know this?
 
◼
Purpose: What is the purpose of this passage? Is it informing you, 
explaining to you or persuading you? 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
read and interpret non-fiction 
texts. 
In Paper 1, the passages will be non-fiction and one of the 
passages will be an ‘unseen text’ which will be unfamiliar to you. 
When dealing with the unseen text, you must give yourself plenty 
of time to read it carefully. However, you won’t have time to read 
and re-read the passage lots of times so try to apply some of the 
following active reading strategies.
 
◼ Before you read the passage, read the title carefully and think 
about what it suggests. Based on the title, what do you think 
the passage may be about?
 
◼ If there are a few lines of introduction, read and consider 
these carefully. 
 
◼ Read the passage to get a sense of the tone and content. 
 
◼ Read the passage again. While you read, use your pen or 
highlighter to circle different things of interest. This is to highlight 
key words and phrases to help you answer the questions. 
IDENTIFYING KEY INFORMATION
TAP IT!
Select one of the types of non-fiction above. What does it look like? Add any 
conventions of this text type that you think are important. 
GENERAL VOCABULARY
retrospective looking back at a past event
conventions features normally associated 
with something
▶
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
Cover the list below. How many different types of non-fiction text can 
you name? 
newspaper article
autobiography
interview
advertorial feature
magazine article
biography
report
newspaper column
travel writing
text book
journal
▼  TYPES OF NON-FICTION TEXT
ACTIVITY 1
TYPE
You should be able to establish the type of text that you are reading very 
quickly. There are three things that will help you here: the subject, the narrative 
perspective and the tense. 
 
◼
Subject: What is the subject of the text? Is the subject matter aimed at a 
particular age group? Where does the text come from? 
 
◼
Narrative perspective: If it is a first-person autobiographical narrative, 
for example, it is likely to be a personal account. Does it seem to be an 
autobiography?
 
◼
Tense: Is it written in the present tense or is it retrospective?
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
153
A writer will usually have a particular audience in mind when they write. Look 
for any clues that might tell you about the intended reader for example.
 
◼
Age: Is the subject matter aimed at a particular age group? Does the 
difficulty of the language suggest a certain readership?
 
◼
Knowledge: What do you need to know to make sense of the passage?
 
◼
Tone: What kind of tone is the piece written in? Is the language used 
formal or informal? 
KEY POINT
Clue as to the writer’s intended 
audience include the level of difficulty 
of the language and the assumed 
knowledge contained in the text.
▲ Siula Grande, Peru
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, PROBLEM 
SOLVING, INTERPRETATION
1 Read the extract from Touching The Void and TAP it. What is the 
type, audience and purpose of the text? Remember that texts usually 
have combination of several purposes. Use highlighters to colour 
code any evidence of different purposes. 
EXAMPLE STUDENT ANSWER
Type: First person account.
Audience: Anyone who is interested in the story. Joe does not use 
any technical language associated with mountaineering and in this 
way he does not seek to exclude the general reader.
Purpose: To engage and inform. 
2 Summarise briefly in your own words:
 
◼
what happened to Joe 
 
◼
what choices face Simon.
EXAMPLE STUDENT ANSWER
Touching the Void is a book by Joe Simpson. It is a true story of how 
he and his climbing partner, Simon Yates, set out to become the first 
people to climb Siula Grande in Peru. They were nearing the end of 
their climb in the Peruvian Andes when a disastrous accident occurred 
in which Joe broke his leg. Simon, who was tied to Joe with a rope, 
felt that if he did not break free, they would both die. As a result, he cut 
the rope supporting Joe and returned down the mountain, believing 
Joe to be dead. Although his leg was broken, Joe crawled his way 
back down the mountain and was eventually rescued.
▼  TEXT TYPE, AUDIENCE AND PURPOSE
ACTIVITY 2
AUDIENCE
The main difference between fiction and non-fiction is that non-fiction is 
usually written for a precise practical purpose, whereas fiction is usually written 
to entertain. You will need to identify the writer’s intention in order to establish 
the purpose of a non-fiction text. It may help you to think of these ‘writing 
triplets’ in order to give you a system for thinking about purpose.
 
◼
Inform, explain, describe: Is the writer writing to make something clear or 
to give information?
 
◼
Argue, persuade, advise: Is the writer writing to discuss an issue or 
persuade someone to share their views?
 
◼
Explore, imagine, entertain: Is the writer writing with no other purpose 
than to entertain the reader?
PURPOSE
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
154
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
look at unseen texts in detail, 
considering language and 
structure.
Once you have read the unseen extract and used the TAP 
technique to begin analysing it, you need to consider the writer’s 
technique. How has the writer used language and sentence 
structure to influence the reader?
ANALYSING THE TEXTS 
WRITER’S TECHNIQUE
Once you are clear about what the piece is about and what the writer is trying 
to achieve, you will be able to consider technique. A good writer will have a 
range of techniques that they use in order to create effect. You should look for 
a variety of techniques but always relate them back to audience and purpose. 
A useful way to identify and understand writers’ techniques is to consider the 
different levels at which devices are used:
 
◼
word level
 
◼
sentence level
 
◼
text level.
▶
 
◼
Before you read the unseen passage, read the title carefully. What does 
it suggest the passage may be about? What might you infer, predict or 
expect from the passage after reading the title?
 
◼
Consider the beginning and ending of the passage carefully.
 
◼
Read the text in full to get a sense of the passage’s tone and content. 
Underline:
 
>
words you don’t understand
 
>
words or phrases that you feel are important – you may choose to 
come back and comment on these.
 
◼
What type of text is it? A first-person autobiographical narrative, for 
example? What about the tense – is it written in the present tense or is it 
retrospective?
 
◼
Who is the intended audience? How do you know this?
 
◼
What is the purpose of the passage? Is it informing you, explaining to you 
or persuading you? 
 
◼
How has the writer used language and sentence structure to create effect? 
 
◼
Also consider what effect is created by the narrative perspective and the 
tone?
COPING WITH UNSEEN TEXTS
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
155
Copy and complete the following table, adding your own example of a word 
level feature to comment on. Review the section, ‘Use of Language’ (pp.xxx–
xxx), if you need help thinking about language features in more detail. 
Read the following short lines of text. What do you notice about the 
language used? Can you identify which of the techniques in the Hint 
box are being used in each?
▼  FEATURES AT WORD LEVEL
ACTIVITY 1
Best Ever Mega 
Monday Amazing 
200% Discount 
Sale!
This film was fast, 
funny and full of 
surprises! •••••
Work, work, work? 
Get the laughs back 
in your life this 
Thursday at the 
Comedy Club.
Is your girlfriend 
afraid of your 
mother?
Nine out of ten 
dogs would 
recommend 
Doggibix.
Sunshine Spas: 
simply the best!
Imagine that the extract from Touching the Void in the previous section 
is the unseen passage. What words or phrases in Joe’s account most 
vividly shows (a) the pain he suffers as a result of his injuries and (b) his 
thoughts and feelings? Comment on the language used in the passage. 
▼  TOUCHING THE VOID
ACTIVITY 2
STRUCTURING YOUR RESPONSE
▼  WORD LEVEL 
FEATURE
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  EFFECT
Simple language 
 
 
‘He would leave me. He had 
no choice.’ 
 
Joe’s simple language portrays 
the starkness of the choices 
available to Simon and how life-
threatening Joe’s injury really is. 
Use of direct 
speech 
 
 
‘“You’re dead” “I’m dead.” 
Everyone said it… if there’s 
just two of you a broken 
ankle could turn into a death 
sentence.’ 
Direct speech helps to convey 
the immediacy of thought and to 
bring other perspectives into the 
first-person narrative. 
HINT
It may help you if you think about these 
specific devices:
 
◼
rhetorical questions
 
◼
hyperbole
 
◼
facts and stats
 
◼
list of threes
 
◼
superlative
 
◼
repetition
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
156
The way in which a writer combines words and phrases into sentences 
is important. Look again at the extract from Touching the Void, 
considering it as a typical unseen passage. Find two examples of 
sentence level features that you could comment on. Go back to the 
section, ‘Use of Language’ (pp.xxx–xxx), if you need a reminder of 
sentence structure features.
▼  SENTENCE LEVEL 
FEATURE
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  EFFECT
Simple sentences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘My leg!... My leg!’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Joe’s account uses 
a number of short, 
simple exclamatory 
sentences that show the 
sudden horror of the 
situation. Here, the two 
exclamation marks and 
ellipsis convey the panic 
he is feeling while the 
repeated simple sentence 
is sharp, mirroring the 
sudden pain he feels. 
▼  FEATURES AT SENTENCE LEVEL 
ACTIVITY 3
HINT
The grammatical construction of a 
sentence is called its syntax. This includes 
both punctuation and sentence type. For 
example: ‘Robbed!’ The syntax of this 
exclamatory, one-word simple sentence 
evokes a sense of emotion and drama. The 
message is conveyed quickly to the reader 
and in an emotive manner.
The appearance of the text on the page can also be used to create meaning, 
such as, the use of subheadings and paragraphing. There will be less to say 
about this when analysing some texts; however, always be aware of text 
level features how the writer creates an effect at the text level. This can be 
an umbrella term to cover aspects of the text you have not yet discussed. 
Copy and complete the table, adding examples and explaining their effects. 
▼  TEXT LEVEL 
FEATURE
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  EFFECT
First person 
narrative
 
 
Two different 
perspectives 
 
‘I hit the slope...’ 
‘Joe had 
disappeared...’
By using two different perspectives, 
Touching the Void allows the reader to 
appreciate the horror from the perspective 
of the victim and the friend. As such, the 
suspense and discomfort is even more 
acute as the reader is forced to engage 
with Joe’s physical pain but also Simon’s 
fear as he believes his friend is dead. 
▼  FEATURES AT TEXT LEVEL
ACTIVITY 4
HINT
Your aim is not simply to identify 
techniques, but to explain the effects of 
the author’s craft. A weak answer simply 
re-tells the events of the passage; a strong 
answer comments on the way in which 
language is used to create meaning and 
prompt reader response.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
157
Refer back to the extract from Ellen MacArthur’s autobiography on 
pages 59-60. It deals with an emergency she faced on the 44th day of 
the Vendée Globe yacht race when she had to replace an essential sail. 
How does this passage bring out the thoughts and feelings of Ellen 
MacArthur as she sails alone in a race around the world? 
▼  CONSIDERING LANGUAGE 
ACTIVITY 5
▲ Ellen MacArthur’s yacht Kingfisher competing in the Vendeé Globe race
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
KEY POINT
In analysing texts, try to cultivate the 
skill of registering effects at different 
levels, including the syntax and the 
text. This is like zooming in and 
panning out.
INDICATIVE CONTENT
MacArthur’s style is unaffected and frank, and seems very powerful because 
it is a very personal narrative. The passage highlights the enormous physical 
and psychological challenges in sailing alone in heavy seas near Antarctica. 
The fact that it is set at Christmas and that MacArthur is female and small, 
in comparison with most of the other competitors, makes it seem even more 
extraordinary. The challenge seems almost superhuman, but MacArthur’s 
narrative shows that she is very human and subject to the same feelings as the 
rest of us. This leads the reader to ask what her motivation can be.
There is much use of the first-person pronoun. Other features of style include: 
 
◼
use of technical language giving a sense of the reality of the situation, 
although this is not overdone  
 
◼
straightforward, direct language; active verbs (‘climbed’, ‘worked’, 
‘agonised’, ‘streamed’); limited and precise use of adjectives and adverbs; 
repeated sentence structure often using a first-person construction  
 
◼
use of words, phrases and clauses that suggest struggle, effort or 
challenge, such as, ‘the hardest climb to date; there would be no second 
climb on this one’  
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
158
 
◼
many conversational features, such as contractions (‘I’d’), fillers (‘odd massive 
wave’), use of the verb ‘to get’ and words like ‘thing’, repetition of words within 
a sentence for emphasis, all of which add immediacy to the writing 
 
◼
the syntax begins to break down as the passage reaches its climax; she 
even breaks into direct speech, as though talking to herself, for example, 
‘not far now, kiddo, come on’; this adds to the sense of urgency and 
drama and makes the reader feel present  
 
◼
occasionally more detailed phrasing, including comparisons, is used, for 
example, ‘as if I was stepping out on to the moon’, ‘This is what it must 
look like to the albatross’ and ‘I felt like a million dollars’; but most of the 
writing is very literal, for example, ‘I couldn’t feel my fingers’  
 
◼
strong focus on words that convey detail, for example, describing the 
features and equipment of the boat, including the height of the mast, the 
weather, the waves; this gives a strong sense of the situation’s reality  
 
◼
direct language is used to detail her feelings, for example, ‘agonised’, 
‘exhausted’, ‘rallied’; it is also used to convey the physical and psychological 
effort required, such as, ‘This was by far the most dangerous part’  
 
◼
the strongest phrasing, reflected in the use of more complex words, is 
often linked to moments of potential danger, sometimes suggestive of near 
panic: ‘a world over which I had no control’, ‘you are a passive observer’, 
‘the frustration was unreal’, ‘no time for complacency now’  
 
◼
humorous lightening of tone at the end with the reference to Santa.  
KEY POINT
Ellen MacArthur is known first and 
foremost as a yachtswoman, not a 
writer, and her style is not ‘literary’ but 
it is complex nonetheless.
▼  FROM HOW THE POOR DIE BY GEORGE ORWELL 
After some days I grew well enough to sit up and study the 
surrounding patients. The stuffy room, with its narrow beds so close 
together that you could easily touch your neighbour’s hand, had 
every sort of disease in it except, I suppose, acutely infectious cases. 
My right-hand neighbour was a little red-haired cobbler with one leg 
shorter than the other, who used to announce the death of any other 
patient (this happened a number of times, and my neighbour was 
always the first to hear of it) by whistling to me, exclaiming ‘Numéro 
43!’ (or whatever it was) and flinging his arms above his head. This 
man had not much wrong with him, but in most of the other beds 
within my angle of vision some squalid tragedy or some plain horror 
was being enacted. In the bed that was foot to foot with mine there 
lay, until he died (I didn’t see him die — they moved him to another 
bed), a little weazened man who was suffering from I do not know 
what disease, but something that made his whole body so intensely 
sensitive that any movement from side to side, sometimes even the 
weight of the bedclothes, would make him shout out with pain. His 
worst suffering was when he urinated, which he did with the greatest 
difficulty. A nurse would bring him the bedbottle and then for a long 
time stand beside his bed, whistling, as grooms are said to do with 
horses, until at last with an agonized shriek of ‘Je fissel’ he would  
get started. In the bed next to him the sandy-haired man whom I 
had seen being cupped used to cough up blood-streaked mucus at 
all hours. My left-hand neighbour was a tall, flaccid-looking young 
man who used periodically to have a tube inserted into his back and 
astonishing quantities of frothy liquid drawn off from some part of his 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
15
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
25
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
159
body. In the bed beyond that a veteran of the war of 1870 was dying, 
a handsome old man with a white imperial, round whose bed, at all 
hours when visiting was allowed, four elderly female relatives dressed 
all in black sat exactly like crows, obviously scheming for some pitiful 
legacy. In the bed opposite me in the farther row was an old bald-
headed man with drooping moustaches and greatly swollen face and 
body, who was suffering from some disease that made him urinate 
almost incessantly. A huge glass receptacle stood always beside his bed. 
One day his wife and daughter came to visit him. At sight of them the 
old man’s bloated face lit up with a smile of surprising sweetness, and 
as his daughter, a pretty girl of about twenty, approached the bed I saw 
that his hand was slowly working its way from under the bedclothes. 
I seemed to see in advance the gesture that was coming — the girl 
kneeling beside the bed, the old man’s hand laid on her head in his 
dying blessing. But no, he merely handed her the bedbottle, which she 
promptly took from him and emptied into the receptacle.
About a dozen beds away from me was Numéro 57 — I think that 
was his number — a cirrhosis-of-the-liver case. Everyone in the ward 
knew him by sight because he was sometimes the subject of a medical 
lecture. On two afternoons a week the tall, grave doctor would lecture 
in the ward to a party of students, and on more than one occasion old 
Numéro 57 was wheeled in on a sort of trolley into the middle of the 
ward, where the doctor would roll back his nightshirt, dilate with his 
fingers a huge flabby protruberance on the man’s belly — the diseased 
liver, I suppose — and explain solemnly that this was a disease 
attributable to alcoholism, commoner in the wine-drinking countries. 
As usual he neither spoke to his patient nor gave him a smile, a nod or 
any kind of recognition. While he talked, very grave and upright, he 
would hold the wasted body beneath his two hands, sometimes giving 
it a gentle roll to and fro, in just the attitude of a woman handling a 
rolling-pin. Not that Numéro 57 minded this kind of thing. Obviously 
he was an old hospital inmate, a regular exhibit at lectures, his liver 
long since marked down for a bottle in some pathological museum. 
Utterly uninterested in what was said about him, he would lie with his 
colourless eyes gazing at nothing, while the doctor showed him off like 
a piece of antique china. He was a man of about sixty, astonishingly 
shrunken. His face, pale as vellum, had shrunken away till it seemed 
no bigger than a doll’s.
One morning my cobbler neighbour woke me up plucking at my 
pillow before the nurses arrived. ‘Numéro 57!’ — he flung his arms 
above his head. There was a light in the ward, enough to see by. I 
could see old Numéro 57 lying crumpled up on his side, his face 
sticking out over the side of the bed, and towards me. He had died 
some time during the night, nobody knew when. When the nurses 
came they received the news of his death indifferently and went about 
their work. After a long time, an hour or more, two other nurses 
marched in abreast like soldiers, with a great clumping of sabots, 
and knotted the corpse up in the sheets, but it was not removed till 
some time later. Meanwhile, in the better light, I had had time for 
a good look at Numéro 57. Indeed I lay on my side to look at him. 
Curiously enough he was the first dead European I had seen. I had 
seen dead men before, but always Asiatics and usually people who had 
died violent deaths. Numéro 57’s eyes were still open, his mouth also 
30 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
55 
 
 
 
60 
 
 
 
65 
 
 
 
70 
 
 
 
75 
▲ Orwell wrote How the Poor Die in 1929 after 
being in hospital in Paris
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
160
open, his small face contorted into an expression of agony. What most 
impressed me, however, was the whiteness of his face. It had been pale 
before, but now it was little darker than die sheets. As I gazed at the 
tiny, screwed-up face it struck me that this disgusting piece of refuse, 
waiting to be carted away and dumped on a slab in the dissecting 
room, was an example of ‘natural’ death, one of the things you pray 
for in the Litany. There you are, then, I thought, that’s what is waiting 
for you, twenty, thirty, forty years hence: that is how the lucky ones 
die, the ones who live to be old. One wants to live, of course, indeed 
one only stays alive by virtue of the fear of death, but I think now, as 
I thought then, that it’s better to die violently and not too old. People 
talk about the horrors of war, but what weapon has man invented that 
even approaches in cruelty some of the commoner diseases? ‘Natural’ 
death, almost by definition, means something slow, smelly and painful. 
Even at that, it makes a difference if you can achieve it in your own 
home and not in a public institution. This poor old wretch who had 
just flickered out like a candle-end was not even important enough to 
have anyone watching by his deathbed. He was merely a number, then 
a ‘subject’ for the students’ scalpels.
 
80 
 
 
 
 
85 
 
 
 
 
90 
 
 
 
95 
The text below is an extract from a review of a car, the Capybara when it first 
went on sale. Read the extract and answer the questions below.
STRETCH YOUR THINKING
▼   THE ‘CAPYBARA’ REVIEW
First impressions count for a lot, and unfortunately, the first impression of 
the Capybara isn’t great. The styling can at best be described as ‘challenging’ 
and at worst ‘capable of frightening small children’. Things do get better 
on climbing through the oddly proportioned door, but the shocked look of 
passers-by acts as a constant reminder of the styling.
So it’s safe to say the exterior is an acquired taste and relocating to the 
driver’s seat is recommended. The interior quality is incredibly strong 
and suggests the manufacturer’s money has been directed here whilst the 
designers were left to play outside. Beautifully finished equipment and 
finishes suggest that this is a much more expensive car than it actually is. 
Anyone sat in the sculpted seats is likely to feel reassured that they are 
experiencing a quality product and have invested their funds wisely.  
Inserting the futuristic key into the central console, you are greeted with a 
gentle murmur, rather than the expected rasping shout of other cars in this 
class. This lack of soundtrack continues as you smoothly drive away. Road 
noise is often an issue for small cars, but there is none here. 
The longer you spend in the Capybara, the more you can appreciate its 
character. This is a happy car, unhampered by its looks and far more focused on 
transporting you in comfort and luxury. State of the art safety features including 
laser-guided cruise control, ABS+ and a GPS controlled gearbox cocoon the 
driver in a relaxed environment that you would expect in luxury cars.
But this isn’t a luxury car, this is a relatively cheap, well-engineered small car 
that does its best to defy the first impressions the exterior styling inspires. If 
you can look beyond these, you have one of the best small cars on the road. 
Remember, first impressions can also be misleading – it’s what’s on the inside 
that counts.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
161
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
premodified a noun with a description 
before it, e.g. the big blue car
dynamic verbs: describe possible actions 
or events
modal auxiliary verbs a verb that helps 
another verb express a meaning, e.g. can, 
would, should
personification attributing human 
characteristics to something non-human
phonological of the sound structure of 
words
 
▶ How does the writer use language to convey information and ideas to the 
reader? How does this language try to influence the reader’s response? Use 
these questions to help you to identify relevant points.
 
▶ How does this text address the reader? Why does it do this?
 
▶ This is a car advert, but does it remind you of any other kind of speech or 
writing? Why might it be trying not to seem too obviously like an advert?
 
▶ Does the advert use many technical terms? Why? Why not?
 
▶ Identify some of the adjectives and adverbs which are used. What is their 
purpose here?
 
▶ Can you identify any nouns which are extensively premodified? Why might 
adverts tend to use a lot of premodification of nouns?
 
▶ Can you identify any rhetorical devices which are used to persuade the reader?
 
▶ Can you identify and comment on any dynamic verbs that are used? Look 
also at the use of modal auxiliary verbs. 
 
▶ Where does the advert use personification? Why does it use this 
metaphorical device? 
 
▶ What phonological feature is employed and why? 
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
Read the passage that follows, then answer these questions.
1 Select two phrases that the narrator uses to describe his neighbouring 
patients in the first paragraph. 
(2 marks) 
2 In the final paragraph and in your own words, explain the conclusions 
Orwell draws from his experiences of how the poor die? 
(4 marks)
3 Describe the attitudes towards the sick in this hospital. You may support 
your points with brief quotations.  
(5 marks) 
4 How does the writer use language and structure to create sympathy for the 
patients in this extract?
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, 
including brief quotations. 
(12 marks) 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
AO2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
162
Question 3 is the final question of Section A, and it will ask you to compare the 
unseen text you have been given with one of the texts from the anthology. This 
question is the longest and most complex and represents about half of the 
marks available in Section A. 
5 STEPS TO SUCCESS
STEP 1: Remember that the essay that you write in response to the question 
will be comparative, based on both Text One and Text Two from the Extracts 
Booklet. One will be a text from the Pearson Edexcel Anthology, the other will 
be a text that you have not seen before. The question is likely to focus on:
 
◼
what the texts are about, key themes and the authors’ conclusions
 
◼
how the authors use of language, character and other effects.
STEP 2: Make sure that you focus on the question. Begin by stating what the 
texts are about, both obviously and at a deeper level, considering implicit and 
explicit meaning. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
explore links and connections 
between writers’ ideas and 
perspectives and how these 
are conveyed.
Before you start, read or re-read the 10 pieces of contemporary 
non-fiction from the Pearson Edexcel IGCSE Anthology.
 
◼ From ‘The Danger of a Single Story’ by Chimamanda Ngozi 
Adichie.
 
◼ From A Passage to Africa by George Alagiah.
 
◼ From The Explorer’s Daughter by Kari Herbert.
 
◼ ‘Explorers, or boys messing about?’ by Steven Morris.
 
◼ From Between a Rock and a Hard Place by Aron Ralston.
 
◼ ‘Young and Dyslexic’ by Benjamin Zephaniah.
 
◼ From A Game of Polo with a Headless Goat by Emma Levine.
 
◼ From Beyond the Sky and the Earth by Jamie Zeppa.
 
◼ From H is for Hawk by Helen Macdonald.
 
◼ From Chinese Cinderella by Adeline Yen Mah.
COMPARISONS
NEED TO KNOW
HINT
Make sure you select information that is 
relevant to the question. 
HINT
The final question is worth approximately 
half of the marks for the whole section. You 
should divide your time accordingly. 
STEP 3: Make sure you refer to interesting or relevant points of detail, as a 
very general answer will not be as successful. It is not enough to point things 
out and ‘translate’ the text; avoid retelling the story and make sure you explain 
how the devices and features work, what their effect is on the reader, and 
so on. Ask yourself why the author might have used that kind of language, 
imagery and so on. Remember: Point – Evidence – Explain. 
STEP 4: Draw clear links and contrasts between the texts. Depending on 
which texts you are given, you may also be able to draw contrasts and links 
within the texts as well. Make sure that you compare and contrast the texts by 
using words and phrases such as ‘similarly’, ‘in comparison’ or ‘on the other 
hand’.
STEP 5: Quote briefly, using a single word or phrase, to support your 
comments. You may refer to a whole paragraph or long section, but do not 
copy it out in full. Show that you are quoting by using inverted commas. 
Because you should only use short quotations, you should integrate them 
into your sentences and introduce them with a comma or colon. Whenever 
you quote, always explain in your own words what the quotation means and 
comment on its effect, with particular focus on language and structure.
▶
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
implicit suggested or understood without 
being stated directly
explicit expressed in a way that is very 
clear and direct
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
163
Touching the Void is an autobiography by Joe Simpson. Unusually for an 
autobiography, it is presented from both the perspective of Joe, and of 
his climbing partner, Simon Yates, in the first person. 
Published in 2003, it is a true story of how he and Simon set out to 
become the first people to climb Siula Grande in Peru. However, the pair 
are involved in a terrible accident which results in Joe breaking his leg 
and becoming separated from his partner. Simon is forced to cut the rope 
connecting the pair as he believes Joe to be dead and his only chance of 
survival.
Read the following extract that details the accident from both 
perspectives. 
▼  FROM TOUCHING THE VOID BY JOE SIMPSON
Joe’s account
I hit the slope at the base of the cliff before I saw it coming. I was 
facing into the slope and both knees locked as I struck it. I felt a 
shattering blow in my knee, felt bones splitting, and screamed. The 
impact catapulted me over backwards and down the slope of the East 
Face. I slid, head-first, on my back. The rushing speed of it confused 
me. I thought of the drop below but felt nothing. Simon would be 
ripped off the mountain. He couldn’t hold this. I screamed again as I 
jerked to a sudden violent stop.
Everything was still, silent. My thoughts raced madly. Then pain flooded 
down my thigh – a fierce burning fire coming down the inside of my 
thigh, seeming to ball in my groin, building and building until I cried out 
at it, and my breathing came in ragged gasps. My leg!... My leg!
I hung, head down, on my back, left leg tangled in the rope above me 
and my right leg hanging slackly to one side. I lifted my head from the 
snow and stared, up across my chest, at a grotesque distortion in the 
right knee, twisting the leg into a strange zigzag. I didn’t connect it 
with the pain which burnt my groin. That had nothing to do with my 
knee. I kicked my left leg free of the rope and swung round until I was 
hanging against the snow on my chest, feet down. The pain eased. I 
kicked my left foot into the slope and stood up.
A wave of nausea surged over me. I pressed my face into the snow, 
and the sharp cold seemed to calm me. Something terrible, something 
dark with dread occurred to me, and as I thought about it I felt the 
dark thought break into panic: ‘I’ve broken my leg, that’s it. I’m dead. 
Everyone said it… if there’s just two of you a broken ankle could turn 
into a death sentence… if it’s broken… if… It doesn’t hurt so much, 
maybe I’ve just ripped something.’
I kicked my right leg against the slope, feeling sure it wasn’t broken. 
My knee exploded. Bone grated, and the fireball rushed from groin 
to knee. I screamed. I looked down at the knee and could see it was 
broken, yet I tried not to believe what I was seeing. It wasn’t just 
broken, it was ruptured, twisted, crushed, and I could see the kink in 
the joint and knew what had happened. The impact had driven my 
lower leg up through the knee joint. …
I dug my axes into the snow, and pounded my good leg deeply into the 
soft slope until I felt sure it wouldn’t slip. The effort brought back the 
TOUCHING THE VOID
5 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
20
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
35 
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
164
nausea and I felt my head spin giddily to the point of fainting. I moved 
and a searing spasm of pain cleared away the faintness. I could see the 
summit of Seria Norte away to the west. I was not far below it. The 
sight drove home how desperately things had changed. We were above 
19,000 feet, still on the ridge, and very much alone. I looked south at 
the small rise I had hoped to scale quickly and it seemed to grow with 
every second that I stared. I would never get over it. Simon would not 
be able to get me up it. He would leave me. He had no choice. I held 
my breath, thinking about it. Left here? Alone?… For an age I felt 
overwhelmed at the notion of being left; I felt like screaming, and I felt 
like swearing, but stayed silent. If I said a word, I would panic. I could 
feel myself teetering on the edge of it.
Simon’s account
Joe had disappeared behind a rise in the ridge and began moving faster 
than I could go. I was glad we had put the steep section behind us at 
last. … I felt tired and was grateful to be able to follow Joe’s tracks 
instead of breaking trail*.
I rested a while when I saw that Joe had stopped moving. Obviously he 
had found an obstacle and I thought I would wait until he started moving 
again. When the rope moved again I trudged forward after it, slowly.
Suddenly there was a sharp tug as the rope lashed out taut across the 
slope. I was pulled forward several feet as I pushed my axes into the 
snow and braced myself for another jerk. Nothing happened. I knew 
that Joe had fallen, but I couldn’t see him, so I stayed put. I waited for 
about ten minutes until the tautened rope went slack on the snow and 
I felt sure that Joe had got his weight off me. I began to move along his 
footsteps cautiously, half expecting something else to happen. I kept 
tensed up and ready to dig my axes in at the first sign of trouble.
As I crested the rise, I could see down a slope to where the rope 
disappeared over the edge of a drop. I approached slowly, wondering 
what had happened. When I reached the top of the drop I saw Joe 
below me. He had one foot dug in and was leaning against the slope 
with his face buried in the snow. I asked him what had happened and 
he looked at me in surprise. I knew he was injured, but the significance 
didn’t hit me at first.
He told me very calmly that he had broken his leg. He looked pathetic, 
and my immediate thought came without any emotion. … You’re 
dead… no two ways about it! I think he knew it too. I could see it 
in his face. It was all totally rational. I knew where we were, I took 
in everything around me instantly, and knew he was dead. It never 
occurred to me that I might also die. I accepted without question that I 
could get off the mountain alone. I had no doubt about that.
… Below him I could see thousands of feet of open face falling into the 
eastern glacier bay. I watched him quite dispassionately. I couldn’t help 
him, and it occurred to me that in all likelihood he would fall to his 
death. I wasn’t disturbed by the thought. In a way I hoped he would fall. 
I knew I couldn’t leave him while he was still fighting for it, but I had no 
idea how I might help him. I could get down. If I tried to get him down 
I might die with him. It didn’t frighten me. It just seemed a waste. It 
would be pointless. I kept staring at him, expecting him to fall…
Joe Simpson
40 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
55
 
 
 
 
60 
 
 
 
65 
 
 
 
 
70
 
 
 
 
75 
 
 
 
80 
 
 
 
 
85
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
165
To help you to develop comparative skills, look back at the Touching the Void extract again in order to make 
comparisons within the text. Work with a partner to copy and complete the following table, considering Simon’s 
account, then complete the exam-style question below. 
▼  WHAT WORDS OR PHRASES IN JOE’S ACCOUNT  
MOST VIVIDLY SHOW: 
A) THE PAIN HE SUFFERS AS A RESULT OF HIS INJURIES  
B) HIS THOUGHTS AND FEELINGS? 
▼  WHAT WORDS OR PHRASES IN SIMON’S 
ACCOUNT SHOW MOST CLEARLY THE DIFFICULT 
DECISION HE FACES? EXPLAIN THE REASONS 
FOR YOUR CHOICES. 
Joe’s account focuses on pain and shock: agony, panic and fear. 
He is obsessed with pain and the extremity of the damage, using 
powerful and emotive verbs ‘it was ruptured, twisted, crushed.’ This 
uses the list of threes and emotive language to make us ‘feel his 
pain’. 
 
 
 
 
Sharp, onomatopoeic sounds, such as ‘bones splitting’ and 
‘shattering blow’, using emotive verbs. 
 
Sometimes uncompromisingly direct to intensify sense of reality: ‘the 
impact had driven my lower leg up through the knee joining’; ‘we 
were above 19,000 feet… and very much alone.’ Sometimes detailed 
descriptions involve the reader and put them in his shoes.
 
 
 
Words and images that convey thoughts and feelings vividly and 
frankly, sometimes in a sequence that conveys dramatic changes of 
mood and thought (paragraph 4: ‘A wave of nausea… I’m dead.’); 
phrasing becomes abstract and almost vague at times, suggesting 
trauma: ‘something terrible, something dark with dread’; ‘teetering 
on the edge of (panic)’.
 
 
 
 
 
Uses rhetorical questions, such as ‘Alone? Left here?’. This creates 
an atmosphere of uncertainty, putting the reader in his shoes and 
creating a sense of drama and suspense.
▼  COMPARING JOE AND SIMON’S ACCOUNTS
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION
Read the two following student responses to the exam-style question. 
How well do you think they meet the following assessment objectives?
 
◼
AO1: Read and interpret complex pieces of non-fiction. 
 
◼
AO2: Analyse how writers use linguistic and structural devices to 
achieve their effects.
 
◼
AO3: Explore links and connections between writers’ ideas and 
perspectives.
ACTIVITY 2
▶
KEY POINT
The individuality of your answer will 
lie in your choices of which details to 
highlight and the effect you think they 
have on the reader. Focus your energy 
on these aspects rather than making 
very general comments.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, REASONING, 
DECISION MAKING
▼  MEETING ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVES
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
166
Joe’s account of the climb is very matter of fact and doesn’t spare us 
the grim details of the injury that he sustained earlier in the climb: ‘I 
felt a shattering blow in my knee, felt bones splitting, and screamed.’ 
This indicates that he isn’t really too badly affected currently by the 
psychological trauma of his ordeal. In Simon’s account he is also very 
matter of fact about the experiences of Siula Grande, but the way in 
which he presents it isn’t so horrific, more clinical. As if he isn’t really 
there and is just doing a commentary on someone else climbing the 
mountain.
Joe’s account of the climb uses a lot more exciting language and a 
richer vocabulary to keep the reader interested: ‘Everything was still, 
silent. My thoughts raced madly’. Whereas Simon’s account only uses 
very simple language and is more factual rather than exciting: ‘I rested 
a while when I saw that Joe had stopped moving.’ I think this suggests 
that Joe is perhaps more experienced at writing or was more affected by 
the incident on the Siula Grande. This helps us to understand that Joe and 
Simon aren’t professional writers; I feel that this does take some of the 
possible atmosphere away from the story.
In conclusion I think that there really aren’t that many differences 
between the two accounts, other than the ones that I have stated. I think 
this is because they are both about the same incident and are both 
written from the same aspect of climbers. 
Both Simon and Joe use ellipses in their accounts: ‘I kept staring at him 
expecting him to fall…’. The ellipses help to add tension and makes the 
reader wonder what will happen next. It keeps them on the edge of their 
seat and introduces the idea of an unfortunate event, which can help to 
build up to a climax point. Simon’s account ends with an ellipsis, leaving 
it up to your imagination and making you want to find out more.
This extract consists of two pieces of autobiographical prose narrative 
(or monologues) giving different perspectives on the same event. 
Relatively short paragraphs follow a sequence of time, but the real 
demarcations are provided by crucial developments in thought. The key 
to understanding the piece is to appreciate the different ways Joe and 
Simon respond to the accident. Though both accounts are very similar in 
style, there are significant differences to be explored. 
Simon and Joe both use exclamatory sentences in their accounts. ‘My 
leg!... my leg!’ Joe uses this in particular to emphasise a thought and 
to bring a greater level of attention to the phrase. In this example it 
STUDENT A
STUDENT B
▶
▲ Joe Simpson’s is a great story of  
mountaineering survivial
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
167
highlights how painful this experience is for him and forces an emotive 
response from the reader.
In keeping with this idea, emotive language is used more frequently by 
Joe: ‘something dark with dread occurred to me, as I thought about it I 
felt the dark thought break into a panic’. The use of words like ‘dread’, 
‘dark’ and ‘break’ create a semantic field of horror and sadness.
Unlike Joe’s account, Simon is less emotional and more objective in 
considering the situation in hand: ‘I could see it in his face. It was all 
totally rational’. The use of short simple sentences helps keep his point 
of view very black and white and provokes a less emotional response 
from the reader. It seems fitting that Simon, as the observer, is more 
pragmatic in his analysis of the situation – the reader is aware that he 
feels a responsibility to act and is weighing up his decisions in as calm 
and factual a way as he is able to. 
In conclusion, the juxtaposition between Simon and Joe’s narratives 
illuminates the pathos in the two accounts. The starkly different tones 
force the reader to take sides. The reader is more likely to side with Joe’s 
emotive and deeply personal account. 
HINT
You must COMPARE and CONTRAST. To 
do this, use phrases that shows you are 
comparing, such as, ‘in comparison’, ‘in 
contrast’, ‘similarly’, ‘however’.
Reread the two anthology texts, The Explorer’s Daughter and Chinese 
Cinderella. Compare and contrast how the writers present their ideas 
and perspectives about their experiences.
You should support your answer with detailed examples from both 
texts.  
(22 marks)
You might like to consider: biographical and autobiographical writing, 
style, structure, viewpoint, selection of detail, presentation of fact/
opinion. 
▼  HOW WRITERS PRESENT THEIR IDEAS
ACTIVITY 3
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS,  
INTERPRETATION, DECISION 
MAKING
KEY POINT
Both of these extracts involve father/
daughter relations but there are 
differences in perspective and choice 
of detail that reflect the different 
priorities of each writer.
Compare and contrast Joe and Simon’s attitudes towards the accident. Support 
your answer with detailed examples from both texts including brief quotations 
 
(22 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
AO2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
168
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
practise and perfect skills to 
respond effectively to unseen 
non-fiction in the examination.
You will need to locate quotations in order to support your points 
quickly, under exam conditions. It is important that the quotations 
that you use are short and directly relevant to your point. 
SELECTING EVIDENCE
HINT
Remember to always use quotation marks 
to indicate direct quotation. Wherever 
possible, quotations should be integrated 
into the main body of your own sentences. 
Longer quotations should be used sparingly 
and set off from the main paragraph (see 
Quotations, p. xxx).
Copy and complete the following tables, finding evidence of each 
technique or stylistic choice in the passage.
▼  JOE’S ACCOUNT                                                                    
▼  EVIDENCE
Short sentences 
 
Description of how physically painful 
the accident is
 
Descriptions of feeling lonely 
 
Use of modal verbs (must, could, 
should, would, shall, will) to speculate 
about the future
 
 
Punctuation for effect
▼  SIMON’S ACCOUNT
▼  EVIDENCE
He is careful and considered 
 
He is a realist and understands the 
situation
 
He is unsympathetic 
 
He uses modal verbs (must, could, 
should, would, shall, will) to speculate 
about the future
 
 
Punctuation for effect
▼  SELECTING EVIDENCE FROM TOUCHING THE VOID
ACTIVITY 1
▶
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
169
HINT 
The examination involves a mixture of 
short and longer answer questions. You 
will need to locate the relevant part of 
the passage for each question, but you 
may not need to offer direct quotation for 
the shorter questions. Read the question 
carefully and look at the number of marks 
available to help you to determine how 
much information to include and whether 
you need to quote. 
You have three minutes. Can you find an example of each of these 
techniques in the Touching the Void extract within the time limit? 
 
◼
Ellipsis
 
◼
Exclamation mark
 
◼
Direct speech
 
◼
Emotive language
 
◼
Rhetorical question
 
◼
Use of first person narrative
 
◼
Colloquial language
▼  BEAT THE CLOCK!
ACTIVITY 2
▲ “I kept staring at him, expecting him to fall ...”
1 Select two words or phrases that describe why Simon almost hopes that 
Joe falls. 
(2 marks)
2 In your own words, explain why Simon is feeling good at the beginning of 
his account. 
(2 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
AO2
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
For each of the techniques listed in Activity 2, construct a P-E-E paragraph 
exploring the effect that the technique has on the context of the story and 
its effect on the reader. To begin with, you could complete this example: 
Point: Both Simon and Joe use ellipsis in their accounts. Joe’s passage 
even ends with it. 
Evidence: ‘I kept staring at him, expecting him to fall…’
Explanation: Ellipsis is used as a structural device to create suspense 
and anticipation.
▼  POINT – EVIDENCE – EXPLAIN
ACTIVITY 3
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
170
 
◼
All questions are compulsory.
 
◼
Questions will test reading skills: factual comprehension; inference and an 
understanding of how writers use language; evaluation of how writers use 
linguistic and structural devices to achieve effect and comparative skills.
 
◼
The pattern of questioning consists of short, specific questions on Texts 
1 and 2 (separately targeted) followed by a more sustained comparative 
question drawing on the two passages as a whole.
 
◼
Questions will be phrased so that they are student-friendly and clear. The 
shorter questions will be more factually-based and phrasing more direct, 
for example, ‘What similarities and differences… does the writer note?’ 
or ‘Find four examples of…’. Questions 4 and 5 are longer and will require 
more overall interpretation, for example, ‘Show how the writer is successful 
in using language to make the situation real to the reader.’
 
◼
Section A is worth 50% of the total marks for Paper 1.
 
◼
Anthologies may not be taken into the examination, but the relevant 
passage will be reprinted on the exam paper. 
 
◼
Further examples can be found in the Pearson Edexcel exemplar 
assessment materials.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
prepare for Section A of the 
Paper 1 examination.
PREPARING FOR EXAMINATION: 
NEED TO KNOW
HINT
Timing is crucial for exam success. As one 
of the texts will be unfamiliar, you should 
give Section A more time than Section 
B, being very careful to leave yourself 
enough time to complete the paper. It is 
recommended that you spend 15 minutes 
reading and one hour writing and checking 
time on Section A and one hour on Section 
B.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS 
Read The Scorpion Who Came to Lunch from Gerald Durrell’s My Family and 
Other Animals (as printed in the Pearson Edexcel International GCSE English 
Language paper from June 2010). 
1 Name two plants that grow on the wall. 
(2 marks)
2 In your own words, explain what the writer’s thoughts and feelings are 
towards the scorpions. 
(4 marks)
3 Describe what we learn about the boy’s character from his thoughts about 
the scorpions and how he treats them? You may support your points with 
brief quotations. 
(5 marks)
4 Remind yourself of the passage from A Passage to Africa (Text Two in 
the Extracts Booklet). How does the writer present his views about his 
experiences as a television reporter in Somalia? You should support your 
answer with close reference to the passage, including brief quotations. 
 
(12 marks)
5 [Question 5 is based on both Text One and Text Two.] Compare how the 
writers present their ideas and perspectives about their experiences. 
Support your answer with detailed examples from both texts. 
(22 marks) 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
AO2
Prepare for Section A of the Paper 1 examination by answering 
questions on an unprepared non-fiction reading passage (Text 1),  
drawn from a range of contemporary non-fiction, including 
autobiography, travel writing, reportage, media articles, letters, 
diary entries and opinion pieces, and questions on a passage 
from the anthology (Text 2).
PUTTING IT INTO PRACTICE 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
171
ANSWERS
1 One mark each for any of the following: moss (bottle-green or rust-red), 
ferns, toadstools. Note that opening questions do not tend to require 
quotations.
2 One mark each for any of the following examples (up to a maximum of two), 
one mark for each sensible explanation (up to a maximum of two): ‘as though 
he were made from polished chocolate’; like it is wearing ‘a pale fawn fur 
coat’; ‘sting like a rose thorn’; ‘tail like a string of beads’. The descriptions 
personify the scorpions, making them seem out of the ordinary, emphasising 
the foreign nature of them and hinting at the danger that lurks within.
3 As the question is worth five marks, aim to make five points about the boy’s 
character. Note that quotation is not required and observation will suffice. 
Answers may include: 
 
◼
the boy loves wildlife
 
◼
the boy respects animals
 
◼
he describes the scorpions in loving detail
 
◼
he enjoys the companionship of animals and gives them human 
characteristics
 
◼
he does not feel the need to conform and does not share his family’s 
view of the scorpions as scary and ugly
 
◼
he respects animals and treats them with care and devotion.
4 Marks awarded for discussion of the writer’s presentation of a war-torn 
country in the autobiographical account, considering how information is 
conveyed; structure; viewpoint and tone. 
Read the following sample student answer and then consider the examiner’s 
comments. 
George Alagiah has clearly been struck in a powerful way by what he 
encountered in Somalia. He wants to make his readers see what terrible 
conditions existed there and how fortunate we are to live in such a different 
world. He also shows that journalists often just start out by looking for the 
best stories they can find. But in this case, the stories affected him on a deeply 
emotional level. 
The most powerful effect of Alagiah’s writing is the way he focuses on particular 
individuals and their tragedies. He describes the death of the ten year-old Habiba 
in a graphic way: ‘No rage, no whimpering, just a passing away’. He is also skilled 
at creating not only images of the terrible sights he saw but also uses the other 
senses to convey the horror, as when he writes: ‘the smell of decaying flesh’. 
One of the striking ways he presents his experiences is by drawing attention to a 
particular moment or sight. He does this especially when writing about the smile 
of the unknown man. His translator’s explanation that he was ‘embarrassed to 
be found in this condition’ disturbed him and he could not get it out of his mind. 
He also realises that he never even found the man’s name, and feels guilty about 
that, too. He almost seems ashamed of his life as a journalist and the way in 
which he was normally able to report on such events in a detached way. 
Overall, Alagiah communicates to the reader the way in which people in that 
situation lack basic necessities and human respect. However, he also reflects on 
how he felt to be witnessing and reporting on these events. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
172
5 Reward responses that compare how the writers present their ideas about 
their experiences. 
Responses may include the following elements or points. 
 
◼
Both texts describe a memorable experience from a retrospective first-
person perspective.
 
◼
Text One describes an event from a child’s perspective, whereas Text 
Two describes a serious event from an adult reporter’s perspective.
 
◼
Text One begins with close, detailed description of the scorpions’ 
habitat, carefully describing minute details such as the cracks and 
moss on the wall and focusing the reader’s view. Text Two begins 
with a list of three, a rhetorical device to emphasise the extreme and 
difficult conditions of Somalia. This, in turn, emphasises how special the 
emotional response that the face he will ‘never forget’ is. 
 
◼
Text One has an ominous title which arouses the reader’s curiousity. Text 
Two focuses the reader on the idea that this is a report about journeys.
 
◼
Text One builds tension through close, detailed description. The 
description of the scorpions as shy but dangerous foreshadows later 
events. The use of the word ‘smuggle’ to describe taking the scorpions 
into the house suggests an illegal action; something daring and 
forbidden. 
 
◼
Text One uses metaphorical and figurative language in its description. 
Text Two is a piece of journalism and uses careful, predominantly 
objective descriptions. They clearly show us the terrible, graphic details. 
The writer uses senses and smells to convey the scene, ‘the smell of 
decaying flesh’.
 
◼
The structure of Text One situates a lot of high activity during the 
final section as a conclusion of the tension built up throughout the 
piece. Rapid actions occur, with active verbs and present participles, 
‘scuttling’, ‘quivering’, whilst polysyllabic words such as ‘pandemonium’. 
Text Two progresses slowly, passing over a number of characters, but 
creating suspense as the reader waits for the unforgettable man. There 
is a juxtaposition of pain and joy in the description of the man and his 
inexplicable smile.
 
◼
Both texts use direct speech to bring in the voices of other characters. 
They are both richly populated with voice and character, though the 
effect of this contrasts: Text 1 is joyous in its ‘pandemonium’ whilst 
Text 2 uses different characters to document the despair, suffering and 
isolation of the victims of famine. 
 
◼
Style and tone is very different in the two texts. Text 1 uses exclamatory 
sentences to give the piece a comedic feel and remind us that we are 
viewing it through the excited eyes of a young boy. Text Two has a 
serious, morbid tone and creates pathos through its unblinking depiction 
of the human suffering caused by famine. 
HINT 
Aim for economical and relevant use of 
quotation in Questions 4 and 5. 
Avoid drifting away from the topic or 
question – for example, by projecting 
modern ideas about animal rights onto your 
reading of the scorpion passage.
EXAMINER’S COMMENTS 
This is a well-focused response that makes very thoughtful points about 
the writer’s views and experiences. There are excellent examples focusing 
on the detail of Alagiah’s language. The writing is accurate, with infrequent 
minor errors. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
COMPARING TEXTS
173
Imagine that you are the teacher in charge of your class. Can you write 
your own top ten exam tips for Section A?
▼  TOP TEN EXAM TIPS
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, CREATIVITY
HINT
All non-fiction texts involve language and 
structure and the writers will present their 
idea. Think about how best to compare 
these things in the given texts in exam 
conditions.
▲ What are your top ten exam tips?
SKILLS
REASONING, COLLABORATION,  
CO-OPERATION, EMPATHY, NEGOTIATION
Imagine that the Pearson Edexcel examination board have asked a group of students to give them some 
feedback on their selection of anthology texts. In groups of five complete the following tasks.
1 Each of you should choose two or three of the pieces. Using your skimming and scanning skills, summarise 
what each piece is about. 
2 Stage a group discussion to decide which three pieces are the most educational and should definitely stay in 
the anthology. 
3 Decide as a group which three pieces you would like removed from the anthology. Make sure you give specific 
reasons for your choices.
4 Working individually, research and choose one other non-fiction text you would like to be included. Why 
would you like this to be included? You may wish to include newspaper and magazine articles, extracts from 
websites, autobiographies or biographies and encyclopaedia entries. 
5 Share your ideas with the rest of your group. Your group of five can only include three new pieces to replace 
those that you have chosen to remove, which means that you will need to persuade others in your group to 
choose your suggested piece. Now hold a vote on which three pieces should be included. 
6 Debate the following statements, with two of the group arguing for each, and three arguing against:
 
◼
‘The anthology extracts are negative tales of hardship or danger.’
 
◼
‘It is not necessary to give young people a say in what they study; teachers will always make better 
decisions for them.’
▼ CONSOLIDATING YOUR KNOWLEDGE
ACTIVITY 1
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
174
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand what is meant by 
‘transactional writing’
Transactional writing is non-fiction writing for a purpose: to 
inform, explain, review, argue, persuade or advise. Each task 
will be aimed at dealing with one or two of these purposes (for 
example, ‘to explain’ will involve some informing). 
Section B of Paper 1 will give you a choice of one of two tasks of 
this kind. Typically, it will present you with a debatable statement in 
inverted commas and ask you to write an article, a speech or a letter 
in which you express your views. You will have about an hour to plan 
and write it and it is worth half of the total marks for the whole paper. 
The topic will not require any specialised knowledge. Topics might 
include aspects of school life, transport and travel, obvious leisure 
activities such as sports and the internet, and aspects of the media. 
AN INTRODUCTION TO TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
HINT
The examiners want to see how well you 
can write, not how much you know about 
something.
▶
1 Read the following extracts from texts with different purposes. Identify the language techniques that are used 
in each text to help it achieve its purpose. 
INFORM 
A videogame console is an interactive entertainment computer or electronic device that produces a video display 
signal which can be used with a display device (a television, computer monitor, etc.) to display a videogame.
PERSUADE 
Nintendo changes the way you play by maximising the fun and minimising the fuss. The Wii console makes 
you feel less like a player and more like you’re in the game.
EXPLAIN 
Why do we play videogames? The need for play is a primary component of human development and has been 
with us since the dawn of intelligence. Even in the brains of animals can be seen the impetus that leads to 
play. So, before we tackle videogaming, we should assess why we, as a species, need playtime so strongly.
2 Choose a computer game, television programme or book that you particularly like. Write three short 
paragraphs like the paragraphs above. One should inform your reader, one should persuade your reader, and 
one should explain to your reader.
ACTIVITY 1
The six types of transactional writing covered in Section B of the paper can be 
defined as follows.
 
◼
To inform: to pass on information (this includes descriptive writing).
 
◼
To explain: to make clear how or why something is as it is.
 
◼
To review: to outline a piece of work, or an event, and comment on it.
 
◼
To argue: to produce an organised sequence of reasons to support a point 
of view.
 
◼
To persuade: to convince an audience or reader to think or act in a certain 
way.
 
◼
To advise: to give useful suggestions and ideas to help someone or some 
people.
▲ Gamers need informative texts
TYPES OF TRANSACTIONAL 
WRITING
▼  TEXTS WITH DIFFERENT PURPOSES
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, PROBLEM SOLVING, 
ANALYSIS, ADAPTIVE WRITING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
175
Look back over the following texts from the Anthology, then copy and complete the table. Which types of 
transactional writing can you find in each text?
▼  INFORM
▼  EXPLAIN ▼  REVIEW
▼  ARGUE
▼  PERSUADE
▼  ADVISE
From The Explorer’s Daughter by 
Kari Herbert 
ü 
 
ü 
 
 
 
ü 
 
ü 
 
 
 
From ‘The Danger of a Single 
Story’ by Chimamanda Ngozi 
Adichi
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From A Passage to Africa by 
George Alagiah 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Explorers, or boys messing about?’ 
by Steven Morris 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Young and Dyslexic’ by Benjamin 
Zephaniah 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Chinese Cinderella by 
Adeline Yen Mah 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘I have a dream’ speech by Martin 
Luther King 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACTIVITY 2
▼  TYPES OF TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
Use other passages that you have read in this book to add more 
examples to the table in Activity 2.
▼  MORE EXAMPLES OF TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
ACTIVITY 3
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
176
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to: 
 
◼
understand in more detail the 
features of writing to inform, 
explain and review, and how 
you should tackle these  
writing tasks.
WRITING FOR A PURPOSE: INFORM, EXPLAIN, REVIEW 
Read the following question and sample student response. The 
following letter is a response to this question:
 
▶ A young person from another country is coming to spend a term at 
your school or college. Write to inform them about your school or 
college and what happens in an ordinary day there.
Dear Emilja,
Our school is called New City High School. The school has been built on 
the outskirts of our town and it is quite a new building. The school has 
1200 young people from the age of 11 up to 18. The school site has been 
landscaped and there are lawns and trees on it. There are playgrounds and 
sports facilities which are very popular.
The day starts at 8.30 am. Most students get there by bus and walk up from 
the bus turning point outside the school gates. Registration is from 8.30 until 
8.45 with your form teacher.  All sorts of things go on in registration time. You 
can hand in notes if you have been off sick, or money if you are paying to 
go on a school trip. Some days you can go out to the library and return your 
books. On Tuesday and Friday there is assembly in the hall. This is where we 
have a speech from the Headteacher and sometimes she gives out prizes and 
cups to the sports teams that have won. We might have some music if the 
choir or the school bands have practised something to play to the school.
Following that lesson 1 starts at 8.45 and what you have will depend upon 
your timetable and what day it is.
ACTIVITY 1
WRITING TO INFORM
In many ways, writing to inform is the most straightforward writing 
task. Its main requirements are that it should be accurate, clear 
and well organised. Explanation also involves giving information, of 
course, but there is a greater need to select the information required 
and organise it so that you explain the topic clearly. A review informs 
us about a product or event and gives us a reasoned opinion on it.
▼  FOCUSING ON THE READER
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
▲ Informative writing is in some ways the most 
straightforward writing task, but does have its 
own challenges.
▶
In explanatory text, it is important to think about your readers and make sure 
that they will be able to understand what you write. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
177
Look again at the letter in Activity 1. Identify an example of each of the techniques listed in the following table 
and explain the effect of each technique.
▼  ELEMENTS/TECHNIQUES
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  EFFECT
Headings
 
 
Facts
 
 
Statistics
 
 
Language choices 
 
 
Structure
 
 
Tone
 
 
Description*
Remember that description is a type of informative writing (since it tells us what something looks like), which 
means that your understanding of this skill acquired from creative writing and from analysis of the Anthology and 
other texts will be useful. 
ACTIVITY 2
WRITING TO EXPLAIN
Any question that contains the word ‘how’ or ‘why’ expects you to do some 
sort of explanation. Use clear paragraphs to organise your response. In the 45 
minutes that you will have in the exam, you will probably have time to include 
four to six paragraphs. Try to link your paragraphs using signposting words 
such as ‘firstly’, ‘therefore’ and ‘in addition’.
▼  TECHNIQUES FOR INFORMATIVE WRITING
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
Students are supposed to line up outside classrooms if the teacher is not 
there. When the teacher arrives you are supposed to: go in quietly; stand 
behind your chair; wait until the teacher has said ‘good morning’; and then 
you can sit down. Outdoor coats should not be worn in class. Students are 
supposed to take them off and put them on the back of the chair. There is a 
cloakroom where they can be left but most students don’t because it is not 
very convenient.
Yours sincerely,
Takuma
Annotate the sample answer, labelling all the positive things you can 
find in it (such as, good sentences, clear writing, good vocabulary and 
punctuation). Now read the mark scheme carefully and decide what 
mark you think this answer deserves. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
178
A number of features will be found in explanatory writing. Copy and complete the following table using examples 
of your own or examples that you have found in the texts in this book.
▼  ‘EXPLAIN’ FEATURES
▼  EXAMPLES
▼  INTENDED EFFECT
The title asks ‘how’ or ‘why’.
 
 
Texts use features such as clear paragraphs, bullet points, bold 
font and subheadings
 
 
Texts use connectives to show a series of points or events (for 
example, ‘firstly’)
 
 
Texts use connectives to explain cause and effect (for example, 
‘because’)
 
 
Texts may contain diagrams
 
 
Texts may use technical or specialist vocabulary
 
 
Texts use formal or impersonal style in which neither the writer 
nor reader is directly involved
 
 
Texts are clearly structured and reach a conclusion that reminds 
us of the question
ACTIVITY 3
The topic you may be asked to explain will not be at all technical. It might be something like this. 
 
▶ Write an article for your school magazine explaining how you make your decisions with regard to either your 
GCSE or your A level subjects.
Write an answer to this question in no more than 45 minutes. See how much you can write in that time while also 
taking care to plan and think about your writing. Complete a table based on the one in Activity 1 to help you use 
some of the techniques listed in the table.
ACTIVITY 4
▼  WRITING A PRACTICE ANSWER
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE LEARNING, 
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
▼  FEATURES OF EXPLANATORY WRITING
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
Try writing the same piece that you wrote in response to Activity 4 for a 
group of 11-year-olds. How would you adapt your language for them?
▼  ADAPTING YOUR LANGUAGE FOR CHILDREN
ACTIVITY 5
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
179
WRITING TO REVIEW
Since reviews are written for commercial publications such as newspapers, 
reviews also need to be well written in order to engage the reader. This also means 
that the register can change depending on the readership: if the readers are 
teenagers, the language will probably be more colloquial and ‘teenager-friendly’.
If you are asked to write a review in Section B, it is likely that it will be about 
a book, a film, an event, or a computer game of your own choice. As part of 
it, you should describe the overall qualities and effects of the subject that you 
have chosen.
 
▶ Look back at the review of Star Wars on page xxx and write down a list of 
the points that the reviewer makes about the film.
Think of a film that you have enjoyed recently and use the table below to plan a review of it in no more than 
six paragraphs. Look at  your list of points made in the review of Star Wars for guidance. Things to write about 
will include the story, the characters, the dialogue or screenplay, the acting, the visual elements (settings, 
cinematography, effects), the pace, the music and so on. 
Paragraph 1
 
Paragraph 2
 
Paragraph 3
 
Paragraph 4
 
Paragraph 5
 
Paragraph 6
Once you have an outline of this kind, it should be easier to think about filling it in. See if you can do this now. 
▼  STORY LINE
▼  SCRIPT/
DIALOGUE
▼  CINEMA TO-
GRAPHY
▼  ACTING
▼  VISUAL 
ELEMENTS
Take care! No 
spoilers!
Including CGI
▼  STRUCTURING A REVIEW
ACTIVITY 6
HINT
The strategies in Activity 5 can be applied 
to any writing task.
The key to writing successfully is to make a plan in manageable sections so 
that you have less thinking to do while you are writing. In the hour that you 
have to complete Section B, you are expected to write 400–600 words (2–3 
sides). 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, PROBLEM 
SOLVING
KEY POINT
Although a review is inevitably 
personal, readers need to trust your 
opinion, so assertions need to be 
evidenced in some way, without bias.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
180
A typical ‘argue’ exam question might be:
‘Some experts believe that a school uniform creates more problems than it 
solves and should be abolished in all schools.’
Give your views on this topic, arguing either in favour of school uniform or 
against it. Your argument may include:
 
◼
the advantages and disadvantages of uniforms
 
◼
the potential problems caused by uniforms
 
◼
any other points you wish to make. 
(45 marks)
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how to distinguish 
between writing to argue, 
writing to persuade and 
writing to advise, and how to 
approach these writing tasks.
Look at the following students’ attempts to begin an answer to this question.
Some experts say school uniform creates more problems than it solves, i am 
going to tell u my views. My first opinion about school uniform is very clear and I 
am against the school uniform, School uniforms are horrible,
i hate ours. Teachers say that it is smart but i couldn’t disagree more. It makes 
me look fat. And the colour is soo bad it makes u feel ill. There are lots of other 
reasons why it is rubbish e.g. it is not cheap and it is not good kwality, they say 
that school uniform makes us look the same so nobody can tell the difference 
between rich kidz and poor kidz, but u can becos the rich ones still make there 
uniform look like designer wear always.
School uniform makes us look like zombies.
In my opinion, school uniform should not be abolished. This is because it makes our 
school look neat and tidy. The ties keep our collars in check, while the shoes make 
us look like young businessmen and women. This is important as it helps to build a 
healthy relationship for our college which is what we should be striving to do.
In my view, the uniform defines us as a school; it distinguishes from others. I 
appreciate that we are not seen as individuals, but it is important that we are 
seen as easily recognised out of school and in school. This gives us a sense 
of pride and belonging. I think it also makes us behave better; nobody gains 
if our school has a reputation for bad behaviour. Moreover, uniform also has 
STUDENT A
STUDENT B
▶
In each of these types of writing, the aim is to persuade the reader 
using various techniques. There are many kinds of ‘argue’ question, 
but they will generally ask you to do one or both of the following:
 
◼ Present reasons, with evidence, in support of (or against) a 
viewpoint.
 
◼ Develop a point of view.
WRITING FOR A PURPOSE: ARGUE, PERSUADE, ADVISE 
WRITING TO ARGUE
▲ Does school uniform create more problems 
than it solves?
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
181
To persuade means trying to influence someone to: 
 
◼
accept a point of view 
 
◼
behave in a certain way. 
The first type of question might ask you to argue persuasively in favour of 
a statement in a class debate question (for example, ‘Smoking should be 
banned in all public places’). The second type of question might ask you to 
write a letter to persuade one or more people to do something (for example, 
take part in a charity event). 
If you want to persuade someone successfully, you will need to use a strong 
argument, but you will be even more successful if you use language to make 
them agree with you. 
Even if you don’t agree with the point of view expressed, it is easy to see that 
one of these answers is much better than the other. 
 
◼ What makes Student B’s answer better than Student A’s? 
WRITING TO PERSUADE
very practical advantages. For instance, we have different ties in our school 
for prefects and for other students. This is useful when prefects do their duties 
because they are easily identifiable.
Ten statements are given below. Five apply to Student A’s work and five to Student B’s work. Read each 
statement and put a tick in the correct column depending on whether you think the statement applies to  
Student A or Student B.
STATEMENT 
STUDENT A
STUDENT B
Sentences are badly punctuated and there are several spelling mistakes.
A wide range of words and sentence structures is used to engage the reader.
Text forms, abbreviations and slang are inappropriately used.
The first sentence repeats the question and there is a limited range of words and sentence 
structures.
It is firmly structured in paragraphs and ideas are carefully linked by words and phrases.
The tone is serious and the argument is very logical. 
The tone is too informal and ideas are not linked clearly. 
The structure is weak and there are no paragraphs.
The spelling, punctuation and grammar are correct.
Points are made clearly, and reasons and evidence are given for them.
▼  WHAT MAKES A GOOD ANSWER?
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING,  
DECISION MAKING
KEY POINT
You can persuade with the ideas 
in your argument, but you can also 
persuade with intelligent use of 
language itself.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
182
Most of us give and receive advice almost every day. This advice is often 
social or moral (for example, how to deal with a personal problem). In general, 
in an exam, you will have to: 
 
◼
give helpful opinions, suggestions or information to a specified person or 
group of people
 
◼
recommend a course of action to someone, perhaps guiding or warning 
them. 
A question may be worded to combine both these possibilities, but the advice 
will almost always be targeted at a specific audience or reader.
WRITING TO ADVISE
Here is an example of a persuasive speech in answer to the following question.
 
▶ How would you persuade the Governors to redecorate the school?
I am here today to tell you that I believe there should be many changes to help students. I know that these ideas will 
cost a lot of money but I reckon they will greatly improve the facilities and the atmosphere.
First I believe we should redecorate the school. If we made the place look more pleasant then students will be 
happier and they will work better too. In particular the toilets are in urgent need of refurbishment. It would be 
a good idea to introduce some new subjects in the curriculum that are more relevant to the students. Teaching 
methods need to be looked at, so that students can have more modern ways of learning things.
You could also look into methods of making people want to come to school. Perhaps you could give special 
privileges to students who regularly attend. The school rules need to be looked at as many are out of date. Why not 
have a special area set aside for smokers, as long as they bring a letter from their parents?
What do you think of this speech? Copy and complete the table, adding points of your own.
▼  MERITS 
▼  WEAKNESSES
▼  HOW YOU COULD IMPROVE IT
It is accurately written. 
It does not go into much detail. 
Give more reasons for the ideas. 
The advice is generally clear and 
structured.
Some of the ideas are controversial and 
the writer should justify them.
Quote more evident to support the 
ideas.
The tone is appropriate and the words 
are formal (suitable for this audience).
It ends very suddenly. 
Show more awareness of the audience 
for whom it is intended.
 
 
 
▼  ANSWERING A ‘PERSUADE’ QUESTION
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING,  
INTERPRETATION
TECHNIQUES 
 
◼
Link your ideas with words that connect and develop the ideas, such 
as, ‘moreover’, ‘furthermore’, ‘in addition’, ‘on the other hand’ and 
words like ‘this’ or ‘these’ to link with a previous paragraph.
 
◼
Use evidence or supporting points from personal knowledge or 
experience.
 
◼
Try to make your language expressive and lively. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
183
‘Writing to advise’ is linked to ‘writing to argue and persuade’. If you give 
advice to someone, you will also be trying to influence them to follow your 
advice, so persuasion and reasoning play a part.
HINT
Do:
 
◼
choose words and sentence structures 
that will influence your reader
 
◼
use good examples and details to 
support your main points.
Don’t :
 
◼
use too many emotive words – this 
can have the opposite effect to that 
intended
 
◼
use statistics that are obviously 
nonsense – this will weaken your 
argument!
Imagine you are an expert who gives advice on a website. Write your 
replies to these questions from a teenager and a parent.
Hello,
I am being bullied by some people in my form at school. They aren’t 
hitting me, they’re just calling me names and I’m fed up with it. What 
can I do?
Mohammed
Hello,
My fourteen-year-old daughter seems to spend all her time on social 
media. I am really worried about her. I don’t understand it. How can I 
help her?
Mrs P
▼  ANSWERING AN ‘ADVISE’ QUESTION
ACTIVITY 3
Look at this exam-style question and part of an answer. How good do 
you think the answer is? 
 
▶ You have been asked to speak to younger students at your school or 
college, giving advice on how to cope with examinations. Write the 
talk you would give.
To some people, examinations are the most difficult situation to go 
through. Others find them easy, an opportunity to show off what they 
have learned. Whichever category you believe that you fall into, it really 
does not matter. The idea is to realise which category you fall into 
then understand how to conquer your weaknesses and maximise your 
strengths. However, what I tell you today will be useful for all of you.
The first stage for any examination is to prepare for it. If you fail to 
prepare, you prepare to fail. It really is a simple as that…
▼  ANALYSING AN ANSWER
ACTIVITY 4
▲ Advising someone involves trying to influence 
them
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE LEARNING, 
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
KEY POINT
You don’t just need to choose 
influencing words, but also influencing 
syntax.
Write your own speech in answer to the question in Activity 4. Your 
speech should be about 350–400 words long.
▼  WRITING A SPEECH
ACTIVITY 5
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
184
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how to write for 
different audiences.
The Section B tasks will specify your target audience or readership. 
Common tasks have included writing to a school class or assembly, 
writing a letter to a headteacher or governors or to a teenager 
abroad, and writing an article for a school or local magazine. As a 
writer, you need to make decisions about such things as register, 
style and tone, all of which will depend on your audience.
WRITING FOR AN AUDIENCE
▶
▶
Consider the following extracts about climate change. What audience 
do you think each one is written for? 
1 Highlight any words or phrases that are particularly suitable for the 
audience.
2 Circle words and phrases that show the register of the piece of 
writing.
3 List the decisions that the writer has made to make the writing 
suitable for the intended audience.
EXTRACT A
Certain gases that trap heat are building up in Earth’s atmosphere. 
The primary culprit is carbon dioxide, released from burning coal, oil 
and natural gas in power plants, cars, factories etc. (and to a lesser 
extent when forests are cleared). The second is methane, released from 
rice paddies, both ends of cows, rotting garbage in landfills, mining 
operations, and gas pipelines. Third are chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 
and similar chemicals, which are also implicated in the separate 
problem of ozone depletion … Nitrous oxide (from fertilizers and 
other chemicals) is fourth… 
EXTRACT B
People are seeing change all over the world. Arctic sea ice is melting 
earlier and forming later. Glaciers are disappearing. Heat waves, 
storms and floods are becoming more extreme. Insects are emerging 
sooner and flowers are blooming earlier. In some places, birds 
are laying eggs before they’re expected and bears have stopped 
hibernating.
EXTRACT C
So what’s going on?
For real, all it takes is a couple degrees 
Before floods, droughts, and hurricanes are not anomalies 
And all these catastrophes become our new realities 
Comin’ down on the world just like the Sword of Damocles.
▼  THINKING ABOUT YOUR AUDIENCE
ACTIVITY 1
▲ Gases that trap heat are building up in 
Earth’s atmosphere
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
185
We need smarter ideas for sustainable policies 
New technologies for a new green economy. 
New discoveries, and new questions to ask 
‘Cuz we can figure out the future by examining the past.
So we sail to the Poles, and sample the extremes, 
And drill into the ice, and discover what it means. 
So use that brain, and make science a priority 
And you can work on stopping global warming with authority.
Read the following extract from the RSPCA (The Royal Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals), which aims to persuade people to 
give money to the charity. Charities depend on people giving money to 
them so their appeals need to be very persuasive. When you have read 
it, copy and complete the table.
Have you ever thought about how the RSPCA is truly amazing?
We’ve been saving animals from cruelty for nearly 200 years. We 
lead the world in showing how to live with animals in harmony 
and respect. And all because enough people in our country care 
about protecting animals from cruelty. Animals cannot speak out for 
themselves. So we do.
RSPCA inspectors have always been the most visible part of our work 
to prevent animals suffering. Today our 370 inspectors and animal 
welfare officers collect and rescue around 119,000 animals every year. 
It seems like people are conscious of animals’ needs, and they are 
prepared to bring suffering animals to our attention.
Looking after pitilessly abused and abandoned animals, and finding 
them new homes is just part of the daily task we face. For instance, 
our 24-hour cruelty and advice line receives over 3,000 calls on 
average, every day, that’s one call every 29 seconds. And each week 
our inspectors have to investigate around 2,750 complaints about 
suspected cruelty to animals. Multiply that by weeks in a month, and 
then by every month in a year.
The RSPCA could not survive without public support. Thank you for 
helping to make the RSPCA truly amazing!
▼  USING SOPHISTICATED TECHNIQUES TO PERSUADE
ACTIVITY 2
HINT
Always In the exam think about the 
purpose. The words in this charity appeal 
have been carefully chosen:
 
◼
to make us feel the horror of animal 
cruelty
 
◼
to stress the positive effect that the 
RSPCA has on animal welfare
 
◼
to emphasise the importance of 
RSPCA inspectors.
▶
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
186
Sometimes the context for advice or persuasion is much more personal. 
The following extract is by a teenager who has been told by a friend that 
she is going to meet someone she only knows from a social networking 
site. She is writing to persuade her friend not to go. Would you expect 
her style (or register) to be more informal? Why might it use some 
conversational features?
Dear Ella, Tabitha
Please don’t shout at me for writing this letter, but I doubt if you would 
let me talk directly to you. I know I am being uptight and intruding on 
your private life but I am sick with worry, since you told me that you were 
going to meet this ‘boy’. We have always been close friends and you have 
always trusted me in the past. So listen to me now. What you are doing is 
plain stupid. Insane, even.
This letter uses different techniques from the RSPCA charity appeal. 
Link the statements about techniques on the left with the correct 
explanation for it on the right: 
▼  WRITING TO A FRIEND
ACTIVITY 3
▼  QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
▼  EXAMPLES FROM THE TEXT
What words in this piece emphasise 
the cruel way in which some animals 
are treated? 
1 ‘pitilessly abused’ 
2 
3
What words emphasise the positive 
aspects of the RSPCA’s work? 
1 ‘harmony and respect’ 
2 
3
What words and details emphasise the 
strengths of the RSPCA inspectors? 
1 ‘The most visible part of our work’ 
2 
3
 
▶ Find an example of each of the 
following techniques:
 
◼
Rhetorical question – a question 
that is asked for effect rather 
than to get an answer because the 
answer is obvious.
 
◼
Short sentences for dramatic 
effect.
 
◼
The use of statistics to prove what 
is being said.
 
◼
Repetition of words, or use of 
similar words, for effect.
▶
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
187
TECHNIQUE
EXPLANATION
1 The style is very informal 
and uses conversational 
language, such as, ‘uptight’ 
and ‘plain stupid’.
A This is to make her feel guilty 
and also to reassure her.
2 It uses a variety of personal 
pronouns.
B This is to emphasise what 
the writer is saying.
3 It uses a variety of sentence 
structures, including 
commands and sentences 
with no verbs.
C This makes the letter more 
personal and establishes a 
direct link with the friend.
4 It appeals to the friend on 
various emotional levels.
D This is appropriate because 
it is written to a close friend.
The extract above could be easily adapted to be a speech, a leaflet, or a 
part of an article. Write a brief piece in a similarly serious and adult style 
on a charity of your choice.
▼  WRITING IN A SERIOUS STYLE
ACTIVITY 4
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING,  
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
▲ Writing to a friend will use a personal style and structure
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
188
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how an 
appreciation of form can help 
you to write what is needed.
The form of a text is the set of conventions that distinguish one 
type of text from another. Think about what makes a review 
different from a news article. Form is partly a matter of layout or 
appearance, partly the approach to the content, and partly the 
style or the way that the piece is written. 
In terms of the content or subject matter, the form of a feature 
article requires that all the content is clearly relevant to the topic, 
organised in a logical and clear way. In comparison, the form of a 
personal letter allows complete freedom to write about anything 
of interest to both the writer and reader (though there are still 
certain conventions) and not necessarily in any particular order. 
In terms of style, a feature article usually needs to be reasonably 
formal, whereas a personal letter can, of course, be very casual 
and colloquial. 
FORM
▶
▶
HINT
It is unlikely that you will be asked to write 
a very chatty letter to a close friend in the 
exam, because the examiners want to see 
that you can write with a good command of 
standard English.
HINT
These examples are all in similar fonts 
because you are not expected to try to 
imitate any of the visual features of the 
form in your exam. For example, if you are 
writing an article you would not need to 
imitate the visual appearance of a large 
headline.
Look at the following openings of various pieces of writing. 
▼  OPENING A
What’s in a name?
Names, common as many of them are, are like little codes: they tell people 
certain things about us, about where we come from. 
▼  OPENING B
Hi Pierre,
I expect the weather over there in Lyon is loads better than here in 
Canada. You don’t want to be out in the sticks here I can tell you.
▼  OPENING C
Dear Sirs,
I write concerning the recent plans for improvements in the local 
environment.
▼  OPENING D
Thrills spills and a gender twist
If you are a fan of Liam Hearn’s books you won’t be disappointed by the 
latest adventure.
▼  IDENTIFYING FORM
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
189
Now copy and complete the following table, writing down the things 
that you notice about the layout and content in extracts A–D.
▼  TYPE OF FORM
▼  FEATURES OF THE FORM
A
 
 
B
 
 
C
 
 
D
In many cases, the layout is the most obvious indication of form. However, it is 
unlikely to be the most important aspect of form.
NEWSPAPER 
AND MAGAZINE 
ARTICLES
 
◼
Short paragraphs
 
◼
Conform to a series of conventional lengths, for example, 
short articles of 600–800 words; full length features of 
around 1500 or so words 
 
◼
Use headlines and subheadings
 
◼
Short introductory summaries
FILM AND BOOK 
REVIEWS
 
◼
Most commonly from 300–700 words, though can be longer
 
◼
Tend to have a punchy or clever headline and sometimes 
subheadings
LETTERS
 
◼
If official or business, writer’s address top right and date 
below; addressee’s address top left
 
◼
Begin with ‘Dear…’
 
◼
Short paragraphs
 
◼
End with ‘Yours sincerely’ / ‘All best wishes’ or similar, 
depending on level of familiarity with the reader
SPEECHES
 
◼
Begin with a form of greeting, for example, ‘Ladies and 
gentlemen…’ 
 
◼
End with a form of farewell, a conclusion suitable to a 
spoken address rather than a written one: this could take the 
form of thanks to the audience for listening
PHYSICAL CONVENTIONS OF FORM
IDENTIFYING FORM BY ITS 
CONTENT
It is the combination of the layout and content that makes forms identifiable. 
Even without the layout of a letter, the words, ‘Dear John’, at the start of 
a piece of writing would identify it as a letter. Similarly, when we read a 
summarising opening sentence such as, ‘Yesterday evening, the Prime 
Minister announced that there would be a referendum…’, we recognise it as 
the start of a news article. 
KEY POINT
Distinguishing one form of writing 
from another goes beyond the sort of 
layout differences that one can see at 
a glance.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
190
 
◼
Headlines tell us what the article is about in a concise, attention-grabbing 
way. For example, it might use wordplay or alliteration and leave out any 
words that are not vital to the meaning.
 
◼
A standfirst or summary sub-heading gives more detail, engaging the 
reader further.
 
◼
Opening paragraphs summarise the gist of the piece, which is very 
different from the opening of short stories or letters.
 
◼
Experts or people involved are often quoted as evidence and to add weight 
to an argument.
THE TRUTH ABOUT LYING: IT’S THE HANDS THAT BETRAY YOU, 
NOT THE EYES
By analysing videos of liars, the team found there was no link between lying 
and eye movements
ADAM SHERWIN
It is often claimed that even the most stone-faced liar will be betrayed by an 
unwitting eye movement. 
But new research suggests that ‘lying eyes’, which no fibber can avoid 
revealing, are actually a myth. 
Verbal hesitations and excessive hand gestures may prove a better guide to 
whether a person is telling untruths, according to research conducted by 
Professor Richard Wiseman.
THE HORSE AS HERO
Michael Morpurgo’s War Horse is a moving and powerful tale of war from 
an unusual perspective. One of the year’s best books for young readers.
The period is that of the appalling horrors of the First World War, in which 
millions died. But few realise that six million horses were also victims of the 
carnage. The story follows the experiences of a horse called Joey, separated 
from his young owner Albert… 
HINT
You are not expected to lay out an article 
as it would appear in print, such as in 
columns and with large fonts for headlines. 
You are being tested on the way that you 
use language, not the visual layout. You 
should still include paragraphs or headings 
if appropriate, though.
NEWSPAPER ARTICLES 
Write a short article that contains the features listed, you could write about aspects of climate change, changes 
in nutritional advice about an interesting discovery arising from research. For example, you could write about 
aspects of climate change, changes in nutritional advice or a historical finding. If you cannot remember the facts, 
then try inventing some. The aim here is to practise the form of your writing, rather than to focus on accuracy.
▼  WRITING AN ARTICLE
ACTIVITY 2
FILM AND BOOK REVIEWS
 
◼
Title of reviews are usually catchy to engage the reader and indicate the 
reviewer’s opinion. 
 
◼
A sub-heading gives more details of the reviewer’s opinion. 
 
◼
Ratings give an opinion on how good the book, film or event is.
 
◼
An engaging opening paragraph sometimes uses figurative language to 
give the reader a taste of what the film or event is like.
SKILLS
PROBLEM 
SOLVING, 
ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, 
CREATIVITY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
191
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
A report is a response to a request for detailed information about a place, 
institution, event or other project. It differs from a news article because it 
requires extensive research into the background and often then gives a 
recommendation as to what should happen next. Governments commission 
numerous reports on all aspects of modern life as the basis for forming policy 
and making decisions. For example, a town council might need a report on the 
roads in a part of the town or the way that schools are fulfilling the needs of 
the community. 
▼  LAYOUT OR PHYSICAL FORM
▼  CONTENT
 
◼
Your address and the date should go in the top right-hand 
corner.
 
◼
The person you are writing to and their address goes on the 
left, lower down.
 
◼
Use ‘Dear Sir/Madam…’ if you don’t know the name of the 
person.
 
◼
Use a subject line to draw the reader’s immediate attention to 
your topic, keeping the language formal.
 
◼
End with ‘Yours faithfully’ if you have started with, ‘Dear Sir/
Madam’. If you have used the person’s name, end with ‘Yours 
sincerely’.
 
◼
If writing to friend or family, you could end with ‘All the 
best’ or ‘With love’.
 
◼
Formal letters normally begin with a statement about the 
reason for writing, such as, ‘I write concerning the…’.
 
◼
Informal letters often begin with a thought for the addressee, 
such as, ‘I hope all is well with you’.
 
◼
Formal letters contain information and make points. They 
may also express thanks or make a complaint.
 
◼
Friendly letters usually contain personal news and might also 
suggest a meeting.
 
◼
The last paragraph before the signing off is usually an 
expression of a hope or good wishes relating to the content 
of the letter: for example, formally, ‘I hope you will give this 
matter your serious consideration’ or, informally, ‘all the best 
until then’.
REPORTS
Write a letter, using the aspects of form in both layout and content 
outlined in the table, to the governors of your school, requesting that 
they improve the school in two ways that you think are important. 
The opening greeting should be ‘Dear Sirs’. Alternatively, you can 
write a letter to a body such as this via the organisation (‘Dear Sir’ or 
‘Madam’, as appropriate).
▼  WRITING A LETTER
ACTIVITY 4
Write a brief review of a book or film you have enjoyed, using the 
features listed above and appropriate language.
▼  WRITING A REVIEW
ACTIVITY 3
LETTERS
▲ What was the last film you enjoyed watching?
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
KEY POINT
Formal letters require adherence to 
certain rules but there is still scope for 
your own choices.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
192
A blog, short for ‘web log’, is a cross between a diary and a personal 
magazine. They vary from those written and designed by professional 
journalists and other writers, which resemble online newspapers, to very 
informal ones written by students or young people. They are found on many 
sites on the internet. 
This is an example of a blogpost from a blogger who reviews computer games.
Still only available as an early alpha build on Steam, but already immensely 
popular, Dean Hall’s bleak, utterly unsentimental zombie survival game is 
unbearably tense and atmospheric. Players are pitched together into a stark 
landscape, and must survive for as long as possible, ransacking buildings for 
guns and food and avoiding the undead. But just as in all the best zombie 
fiction, it’s not the rotting monsters you often have to worry about, it’s 
the other survivors. Each server houses up to 40 players, all desperately 
scavenging for the same meagre supplies. And if you kill another participant, 
you can take their stuff. There is a clear benefit to adopting a ‘shoot first’ 
policy.
HINT
As with other writing questions, you can 
invent details to make it sound more 
convincing and knowledgeable. However, 
you should try to make them realistic.
BLOGS
INFORMATION GUIDES
Write a response to the following question.
 
▶ Your school or borough has been allotted a significant amount of 
extra funding to improve the facilities, enough to pay for some new 
buildings. You have been asked to write a report on the state of 
facilities, in either your local community or your school, in one of the 
following areas: 
 
◼ sports
 
◼ leisure
 
◼ arts
 
◼ provision for pedestrians and cyclists. 
▼  WRITING A REPORT
ACTIVITY 5 
Write a blog post on a hobby or interest that you would like to share 
with others. Try to standard English, but, as you may need to tailor your 
language to the needs of your audience, some informal language may 
be appropriate.
▼  WRITING A BLOGPOST
ACTIVITY 6
These are leaflets organised to offer the reader a brief guide to a place, a 
process, a system, and so on. Read the following question.
 
▶ Write a brief guide to your home town, village or district for new residents or 
a visitor
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
▲ A popular lifestyle and fashion blog
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
193
<M10UP5_2: A 
person reading a 
leaflet.>
As well as providing information, you should organise it logically using 
subheadings and bullet points. I include some facts, statistics and opinions, 
any of which could be quotations. They do not need to be completely accurate 
you can invent things. However, remember that this is supposed to be non-
fiction, so keep it realistic.
HINT
Remember that you can introduce a 
statistic with phrases such as, ‘It is 
believed that...’ or ‘One expert has said 
that…’.
Write an answer to the question above, planning it first using something 
like the following table.
Introduction
Paragraph 2
The neighbourhood.
Paragraph 3
The wider town or environment.
Paragraph 4
Things worth seeing and doing.
Conclusion
Alternatively, you could choose to use a spide diagram to help you plan.
Places of 
interest
Local 
politics
Sports 
facilities
Buildings
Shopping
Things to do 
Famous 
people
Surrounding 
attractions
My home town
Local people
▼  WRITING AN INFORMATION LEAFLET
ACTIVITY 7
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, ADAPTIVE LEARNING, 
CREATIVITY
An information guide can include some descriptive writing. The main 
aim is to bring a scene alive with some vivid phrasing and interesting 
word choices.
Re-read the booklet that you wrote for Activity 7. Have you included any 
extended descriptive sections? Could you add some now? Look back 
at some of the extracts in the Anthology to remind yourself of some 
examples of  good descriptive writing.
▼  EXTENDED DESCRIPTION
ACTIVITY 8
▲ Leaflets are examples of condensed,  
informative writing
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
194
REGISTER
The register of a text is the way in which vocabulary is chosen for a particular 
audience. For example, if you are writing a letter to a friend or giving a talk to 
your class, you will use a more informal register than if you are writing a formal 
letter to the school governors or headteacher.
VARIETY
Variety can be achieved by finding alternative ways of saying similar things 
or making similar points. For example, you could use synonyms instead of 
repetition. Using the same word more than once can make your writing feel 
uninteresting and repetitive. Most words offer you plenty of synonyms to 
choose from. For example, to avoid repeating the word ‘important’, you could 
use ‘significant’, ‘necessary’, ‘needed’, ‘vital’, ‘crucial’, ‘non-negotiable’ or ‘top 
priority’.
Using different synonyms is not just for the sake of variety – words of similar 
but not identical meaning may suit the content better than others. For example, 
the word ‘imaginative’ has different associations to ‘ingenious’, even though 
they are not far apart in terms of their meaning.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
select the right vocabulary 
to make your writing more 
precise, clear and effective.
Vocabulary choice improves with reading and practice. When 
an author’s use of vocabulary is excellent, it makes the text 
engaging and interesting and it makes the writer appear skilful 
and authoritative. It is a matter of choosing individual words and 
the phrases into which they are combined. When thinking about 
vocabulary choice, it can be helpful to subdivide it into different 
aspects: register, variety, impact, the context of word, decoration 
or colour, signposting.
VOCABULARY FOR EFFECT
▶
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
synonyms different words with similar or 
the same meaning/s.
Use your own knowledge, a thesaurus or dictionary to find several 
synonyms each for the following common words: ‘bad’, ‘terrible’, ‘good’, 
‘brilliant’, ‘idea’, ‘interesting’. 
▼  FINDING AND CHOOSING SYNONYMS
ACTIVITY 1
Find more synonyms for the following words: ‘happy’, ‘unhappy’, 
‘success’, ‘failure’, ‘do’, ‘go’, ‘achieve’. Make sure the words are 
grammatically equivalent (that is, if you are looking for a synonym for an 
adjective, you find other adjectives).
▼  LOOKING FOR SYNONYMS
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.
