PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
195
Words do not create much impact on their own. They react with those around 
them in the mind of the reader. A chain of words may be linked by their subject 
matter if, for example, they are taken from the specialist vocabulary of the 
topic. A chain of words could also be linked by tone or feeling: for example, 
a group of positive words and phrases, or a group of words and phrases that 
create a dramatic effect. If you look through any of the texts featured in this 
book, you will find examples of different word chains.
WORDS IN CONTEXT
Your vocabulary choice can be crucial in creating impact, especially in text 
that is intended to be heard, such as a speech. For example, whether you 
are aiming to describe or persuade, techniques such as onomatopoeia and 
alliteration can add force to a sentence. For example, ‘lead us towards a dark 
and desperate situation’ uses alliteration to draw attention to the adjectives 
describing the nature of the situation.
IMPACT
GENERAL VOCABULARY
Repetition Repeating the same word or 
phrase
KEY POINT
Using words for impact has to be 
judged carefully. Too weak a word and 
there is not enough power, too strong 
and you risk sounding melodramatic.
Repetition can be a good rhetorical technique if it is used skilfully, but  
if it is used badly it can weaken the impact of your writing. Rewrite the 
following text, replacing the words ‘point’ and ‘people’ with different 
synonyms and trying to make the sentences more interesting.
Social networking does have many good points. One is that it helps 
friends stay in touch; another point is that you can talk to people 
whenever you like, and this helps people in many ways; a third point is 
that people can introduce friends to other people very easily.
ACTIVITY 3 
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INNOVATION
▼  REPETITION AS A RHETORICAL TECHNIQUE
EMOTIVE LANGUAGE
Using emotive language can certainly add impact to your argument. For 
example, you may be writing about climate change and want to shock your 
reader into action. To do this, you need to emphasise the scale of the problem 
by choosing a more powerful word than ‘problem’. For example, you could 
use ‘catastrophe’, ‘disaster’ or ‘calamity’. 
Compare the following sentences. Which one do you think has a greater 
impact?
If we ignore alternative energy sources now, we will soon be facing a 
problem.
If we ignore alternative energy sources now, we will soon be facing 
a catastrophe.
CONNOTATIONS
You can guide your reader’s reactions by thinking about the connotations of 
your vocabulary choice. Look at the following table. Each of the suggested 
adjectives could be used to finish the sentences, as they have similar 
meanings, but they have different connotations that may affect your reader’s 
response. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
196
SENTENCE
ADJECTIVE
CONNOTATIONS
‘Having a job 
outside school 
makes me…’ 
exhausted
extreme physical fatigue
drained 
emptiness, suggesting that there is nothing left in the 
speaker
sleepy
childishess that should not be taken too seriously
‘Computer 
games are 
often…’
ruthless
lack of feeling or regard for others 
barbaric 
uncivilised 
brutal 
uncaring violence 
The words in the table are also emotive words, meaning that, they trigger 
an emotional response and therefore engage the audience. Such words are 
essential in storytelling, as well as in writing to argue and persuade.
Using words with particular connotations can be very effective in arguing for 
or against a statement. For example, if you are arguing in favour of euthanasia, 
you could describe it as ‘a humane method’. However, if you are arguing 
against it, you could describe it as ‘a licence to murder. The connotations of 
the words ‘humane’ and ‘murder’ will influence the way in which your audience 
thinks about the subject.
Look back at pages xxx–xxx to remind yourself of other ways in which 
vocabulary can be used for effect.
In writing to describe, you may be used to trying to appeal to the reader’s 
senses by including details such as sounds, smells, feelings and or tastes. In 
other forms of writing, where you may not use description (for example, when 
you are writing to argue), you can introduce similar sensory effects by using 
figurative language. 
This is why a writer might say that an unpopular idea went down ‘like a lead 
balloon’, or that a good leader is a ‘knight in shining armour’. Although both 
of these phrases are clichés, they still enliven the writing, and more original 
phrases will have a greater effect.
DECORATION OR COLOUR
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
clichés phrases that are used so often that 
they start to lose their impact
▲ “Having a job outside work makes me ...”
Write an opening paragraph for the following exam-style question, 
focusing on vocabulary to persuade the reader. 
 
▶ The editor of your school newspaper has asked for contributions in 
response to this topic: 
‘Computer games are good for you as well as fun.’ 
You can write in favour of the statement or against it. Remember to 
choose vocabulary for its impact and for its connotations. 
ACTIVITY 4
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
▼  PERSUASIVE VOCABULARY 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
197
Try to use signposting vocabulary so that your points are more clearly 
structured. This is especially useful in speeches, where the paragraphing has 
to be heard, not seen.
▼  PURPOSE
▼  EXAMPLES
To order ideas 
‘Firstly’, ‘secondly’, ‘moreover’, ‘furthermore’, ‘in addition’, 
‘finally’…
To introduce reasons 
or consequences
‘Therefore’, ‘as a result’, ‘consequently’… 
To give alternatives
‘On the other hand’, ‘nevertheless’, ‘however’, ‘in contrast’…
To develop ideas
‘To develop this further’, ‘what this means is’, ‘in support of 
this’…
Decorative language can also be used in informative writing. An information 
guide such as the one that you wrote in response to Activity 7 on page XXX 
can be livened up and made more interesting for the reader by using some of 
the following techniques.
▼  TECHNIQUE
▼  EXAMPLE
Make the description vivid
Use varied adjectives and adverbs
Exaggerate 
‘…has some of the finest views in the south-
west…’
Use humour 
This might include puns, or exaggerated or 
unusual vocabulary
Invent quotations from visitors, 
within reason
The manager of the local football club says that it 
is “the ideal place for a new sports pitch”…
Use irony or litotes
‘…perhaps not the most inviting of buildings…’ 
SIGNPOSTING 
Re-write the information guide that you wrote in response to Activity 
7 on page XXX. Try to improve its readability by including more 
vocabulary for effect. 
▼  USING VOCABULARY FOR EFFECT
ACTIVITY 5
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, ADAPTIVE LEARNING, 
CREATIVITY
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
puns a play on words, such as using words 
that sound similar but mean different 
things, or using two different meanings of 
one word
irony apparently saying one thing while 
actually meaning the opposite
litotes ironic understatement used to mean 
something by saying its opposite
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
198
The simplest way to ensure variety is to think about the first words of each 
sentence and try to make them different from the others. Less-experienced 
writers often start their sentences in similar ways, but the following table lists 
some different methods of opening your sentences. 
▼ TYPE OF WORD
▼ EXAMPLES 
A pronoun  
I, you, he, she, it, we, they, my, your 
‘I write to you as a concerned…’ 
 
A preposition  
above, behind, between, near, for, with
‘In all of our towns, there are…’ 
A present participle (or -ing word) 
thinking, watching, caring, making
‘Looking at the state of the parks in our 
area…’
An adjective  
huge, beautiful, terrible, strange
‘Noisy, threatening lorries rumble past…’ 
An adverb (usually end in -ly)  
happily, unfortunately, unhelpfully
‘Alarmingly, the facts are…’ 
A conjunction (subordinate clause + main 
clause)  
if, although, because, when, while
‘Although there are limits to the amount 
of money available…’  
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how you can 
control sentences for greater 
impact.
SENTENCES FOR EFFECT 
SENTENCE OPENINGS 
STRUCTURING OF SENTENCES
LONGER COMPLEX SENTENCES 
Complex sentences, containing one or more subordinate clauses, are good 
for conveying information or ideas, so try using them in explanations and 
arguments. They give an impression of fluent thinking, although you should be 
careful not to let a sentence ramble as you may lose your reader’s attention). 
The following text is an example of a complex sentence. What impression does 
it give?
While some people think that global warming is a natural phenomenon that 
has happened many times before in the Earth’s history, others, looking hard 
at the scientific evidence, are convinced that we are mainly responsible.
Consciously structuring your sentences will help your writing to 
make an impression
Using at least five of the styles of sentence opener in the table above, 
write different openings for an answer to this exam-style question.
 
▶ Explain how you think we could improve our efficiency in recycling.
▼  VARYING YOUR SENTENCE OPENINGS
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
199
THE IMPORTANCE OF 
PUNCTUATION 
Punctuating sentences correctly is not just for the sake of showing that you 
can do it. It also directly affects the impact you have on the reader.
One of the errors that many students make is using the comma splice, which is 
the name given to a comma used where there should be a full stop, a semi-
colon or colon, or a comma with a conjunction. For many readers, the comma 
splice interrupts fluent reading.
▼ THE COMMA SPLICE
▼ EXAMPLE CORRECT ALTERNATIVES
The school sets too much homework, this 
is why a lot of students are demotivated.
…too much homework. This is why…
…too much homework: this is why…
…too much homework, which is why…
Many subordinate clauses begin with adverbial conjunctions, such as 
‘because’, ‘if’, ‘while’, ‘when’, ‘so that’, ‘after’, ‘before’ and so on. These 
conjunctions play an important part in putting your ideas in order and linking 
thoughts together in a complex sentence.
ENDING FOR IMPACT 
You can structure your sentences to ensure that the main point is emphasised. 
The last words of a sentence tend to stand out because they are read or heard 
most recently, so it is a good technique to place important words at the end of 
a sentence. Compare the following sentences and their endings.
The government can just ignore it, despite all the work and research.
The final insult is that, after all the work and research, the government can 
just ignore it.
The second sentence places the main point of the sentence at the end, where 
it is emphasised, and is therefore a bit more powerful than the first. 
THE LONG AND THE SHORT 
Short, punchy, single-clause sentences can add impact to an argument, or add 
variety or surprise to a description or piece of information. Short sentences 
are particularly effective when they follow a longer multi-clause sentence.
For example, if you used a long and complex sentence to explain a particular 
point, you could follow it with a simple statement such as ‘They are right’ or 
‘We need it now’ to emphasise the point.
Look at the exam-style question.
 
▶ ‘Television is mostly a waste of time and distracts us from better 
things we could be doing’. Write an argument giving your views on 
this statement.
Write an introduction, using the skills above, to make an impression on 
the reader. 
ACTIVITY 2
KEY POINT
Concentrate on the ends of your 
sentences to make maximum effect. 
Short sentences ending with the main 
point, or a memorable phrase make 
more impact.
▼  WRITING TO MAKE AN IMPRESSION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS
▲ A waste of time?
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
200
When you read a text, you probably expect the opening to be interesting, 
and grab your attention in some way. The following table lists some effective 
techniques that you can use to improve your openings. 
Which technique you use will depend on the task. 
▼ TECHNIQUE
▼ EXAMPLE
A rhetorical question 
‘How often do you take action when you feel something ought to be done?’ 
An arresting or controversial statement 
‘It’s not children who need educating about recycling – it’s the grown-ups who ought to 
know better.’ 
A surprising or shocking fact or statistic* 
‘The unreleased energy contained in the average dustbin each year could power a 
television for 5,000 hours.’
A relevant quotation 
‘We live in a disposable society. It’s easier to throw things out than to fix them.’  
A short and relevant anecdote
‘I have found it saves money to reuse the plastic containers…’
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how to write 
effective openings and 
conclusions to your writing.
OPENINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 
OPENINGS
HINT
Remember that your statistics do not have 
to be accurate in the exam; they just have 
to sound plausible. However, if you are 
writing for homework, you should check 
that your statistics are correct.
Write two possible openings to a response to the following question. 
 
▶ Write an article arguing for or against the proposal that the smacking 
of children should be made illegal.
▼  USING DIFFERENT KINDS OF OPENING
ACTIVITY 1
One of the benefits of planning is that you are less likely to write 
a weak or uncertain opening because you have thought about 
what you are going to write. A mistake that students can make if 
they have not planned their response, is to simply repeat words 
from the question with a phrase such as, ‘In this article I am 
going to write about…’. Since your reader already knows this, it is 
a waste of time and is uninteresting.
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
KEY POINT
The pressure of getting started can 
often lead to a bland opening just to 
get something on the page. It pays to 
resist this and rather think through 
your first words.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
201
An effective conclusion will leave the reader with a strong impression 
and should make them remember the point that you have made. A weak 
conclusion will leave them with less to remember. Different techniques can be 
used to achieve a strong conclusion, as shown in the following table.
▼ TECHNIQUE: CONCLUDE WITH…
▼ EXAMPLE
…a positive, upbeat note
‘This is surely a recipe for success.’
…a warning
‘If we do not act soon, then it may be too late to save…’
…an appeal for action
‘We must act now – and act quickly – to save our heritage.’
…a question for people to think about
‘Couldn’t that be best outcome of them all?’
…a vivid image
‘Just a single light, shining in the dark.’
… a link with the opening, though not 
repeating the wording
‘Perhaps the question that we asked at the outset was the wrong question. Perhaps we 
should ask instead...’
The following extracts are the openings of some of the texts in this book. Read each one and then write down the 
features that make them effective openings. 
EXTRACT A
‘I’m a storyteller. And I would like to tell you a few personal stories about what I like to call “the danger of the 
single story.”’
EXTRACT B
‘I saw a thousand hungry, lean, scared and betrayed faces as I criss-crossed Somalia between the end of 1991 and 
December 1992, but there is one I will never forget.’ 
EXTRACT C
‘I have a dream…I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed.’
EXTRACT D
‘Paper has more patience than people.’
EXTRACT E
‘Possibly acute surgical is the heaviest type of work there is, I think, more wearing than anything else on earth.’
ACTIVITY 2
CONCLUSIONS 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS
Look back at the two openings that you wrote in Activity 1. Write two possible conclusions to the pieces, using 
different techniques.
▼  USING DIFFERENT KINDS OF CONCLUSION
ACTIVITY 3
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
Find three examples of conclusions from extracts in this book and explain why they are effective.
▼  EFFECTIVE CONCLUSIONS
ACTIVITY 4
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, REASONING
EFFECTIVE OPENINGS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
202
You can plan using spider diagrams, thought clouds, lists and so on: it doesn’t 
matter at all as long as it works for you. A good idea to start with is to jot down 
the three primary things about any piece you write: the purpose, the audience 
and the form. You can base some ideas on this triplet. For example, refer to the 
audience, especially when writing a speech; state your purpose clearly; and 
use appropriate language for the form. Above all, jotting down your ideas will 
help ensure that you don’t forget them.
Once you have planned, the next thing to do is to generate some ideas. One 
idea per paragraph is a good start. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand the importance of 
planning
 
◼
improve your planning 
techniques.
It is very helpful to plan before writing. Once you have a plan, you 
will feel more confident that you can write a successful piece and 
this confidence will show in your writing. Since you have about an 
hour for Section B, you can spend 10–15 minutes planning carefully. 
IDEAS AND PLANNING 
PLANNING TECHNIQUES
If you can think of two contrasting approaches to the topic, it will help you to make relevant points. Consider the 
following question. 
 
▶ Write an article for a local or school magazine on the topic: ‘Not enough attention is paid to the problem of 
stress in the lives of modern teenagers’. 
A student has used the following table to plan their response to this question. If you choose to use this method, 
you do not need to fill out all the rows: five or six should be enough for the essay that you write in the exam.
You will know when your plan is detailed enough, because at that stage you should feel that the essay will be 
straightforward to write.
POINT
APPROACH 1
APPROACH 2
Time perspective 
 
The past – was life less stressful and how? 
Working hours? Less competition? More 
stability in work and communities? 
The present and the future – we are healthier, but are 
we under more pressure in hearts and minds? If so 
why? Less family stability?
Views of different 
groups  
Group A: Middle class boys – traditionally less 
worried about next generation, perhaps? 
Group B: Working class young people – more 
worried about the future of the planet and their own 
future etc.?
Anecdotes to tell 
Things that involved you or a friend 
Something that involved someone you have heard of 
Different aspects of 
the subject
Types and causes of stress: work, health 
Other causes: relationships, environment 
How to tackle 
problem
Step 1: understand causes 
Step 2: try to decide on a plan or part of one 
Gender angle
Boys 
Girls 
▼  STRATEGIES FOR PLANNING
ACTIVITY 1
▶
▶
▲ Spider diagrams can be useful for planning
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, REASONING, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
203
Possible benefits / 
problems 
Physical, or tangible: 
Psychological: 
Timeframe
Stage 1
Stage 2
What to do now – 
warning for future?
Can’t avoid stress but must organise life so that 
each individual is not overloaded
HINT
Some exam questions will contain 
prompts of this kind. They give a useful 
place to start structuring your answer. In 
terms of the previous planning table, the 
three main points opposite would fit the 
‘time perspective’ approach. Notice that, 
although this is mainly a piece of writing 
to explain, it clearly gives opportunities to 
inform, to describe and to persuade. 
 
▶ Write a speech for your class or year group, in which you try to persuade them to participate in the school’s 
extra-curricular activities.
Plan your response to this question. You could try using the planning table or use another strategy, such as 
spider diagrams or lists. Consider your own experiences and how you could use them to persuade others that 
the extra-curricular activities at your school are valuable.
▼  PRACTISE YOUR PLANNING
ACTIVITY 3
 
▶ Your local council wants to improve provisions for teenagers in the 
neighbourhood. Write a report for the council explaining how, in your 
view, the local facilities might be improved. 
Plan the report first. You could include: 
 
◼
what facilities exist at present
 
◼
your ideas about how they can be improved
 
◼
ideas about providing new facilities.
Introduction
 
◼
facilities which are widely believed to be inadequate
 
◼
many ideas are being discussed
 
◼
motivate and engage teenagers: anecdotes or statistics of recent problems
Main point 1: Present facilities
 
◼
present state: what we have now (e.g. not enough land / can only 
accommodate…)
 
◼
poor conditions: e.g. football pitch / tennis court (quote expert views)
Main point 2: Improvements suggested
 
◼
youth centre: redecorate with help of teenagers
 
◼
repair sports pitch: apply for sponsorship from sports company
 
◼
build skateboard park
 
◼
provide more computers and video games in local library
Main point 3: New facilities
 
◼
bowling alley: give an estimate of how much money this could generate
 
◼
café to be managed by volunteers
Conclusion
 
◼
summarise the benefits of suggestions
▼  PLANNING A REPORT WITH RECOMMENDATIONS
ACTIVITY 2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
204
‘Schools have a duty to continually improve conditions for students’
Your speech may include:
 
◼
who should have responsibility for improvements
 
◼
whether improvements would help students
 
◼
any other points you wish to make.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how all the methods 
and techniques discussed in 
this chapter can combine to 
make a good answer.
PUTTING IT INTO PRACTICE
HINT
Think of planning first. Notice that the 
question asks you to argue and persuade: 
‘argue’ means that you should present 
your own views and explain why others are 
wrong; ‘persuade’ means that you need 
to think about your audience and how to 
encourage them to think the way that you 
do.
Using the following table to help you, make your own plan for the task 
question.
▼ PARAGRAPH PLAN 
▼ TECHNIQUES TO USE
Intro: mention poor conditions – 
suggest there is an answer.
Para 1: argue link between 
environment and work (Ofsted, etc.).
Para 2: what some people think (to 
counter).
Para 3: persuasive questions.
Para 4: argue what is minimum 
needed now – joint action needed.
Para 5: What are current plans to 
improve?
Conclusion: politicians, etc.
 
◼
Rhetorical questions.
 
◼
Direct address to reader.
 
◼
Alliteration – ‘dreary dining 
rooms’.
 
◼
Imperatives – short final sentence.
 
◼
Connectives – ‘moreover’, ‘firstly’, 
so on.
 
◼
Use ‘us’ and ‘we’.
 
◼
Variety of sentences.
 
◼
Facts and statistics.
 
◼
Some informal vocab.
▼  IDEAS AND PLANNING 
ACTIVITY 1
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
Now read through the following answer and the comments.
SAMPLE ANSWER
INTRODUCTION 
For how much longer must students in school put up with dilapidated 
classrooms, sub-standard social areas and dreary dining rooms? Ambitious and 
hardworking students like your children/students deserve better. 
DEVELOPMENT OF IDEAS 
The first reason why conditions must improve is that a poor quality environment 
leads to poor quality work. Substandard work restricts students’ chances of 
achieving good qualifications. With an under-qualified workforce, the whole 
nation will suffer. 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
Write the text for a speech for a group of parents or governors 
to argue that conditions in schools should be improved and to 
persuade people that they should make their views on the matter 
known. 
(45 marks)
AO4
AO5
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, REASONING, 
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
205
Cluttered classrooms Alliteration.
Some people think . . . The first two sentences 
in this paragraph pre-empt the opposition’s 
point of view. The last sentence then 
counters the opposition.
Have you ever A series of rhetorical questions  
depicting the apparently foolish viewpoint 
that the listener may hold, and then 
suggesting that an alternative.
We’re Identifying the listener’s perspective 
as parents and identifying the speaker’s 
ideas with theirs by the use of ‘we’.
attractive, airy buildings . . . Descriptive 
detail and several specific ideas give the 
demands substance.
Ofsted reports repeatedly expose the grim quality of Britain’s school premises. 
Cluttered classrooms, foul toilet facilities and inadequate outdoor space are all 
too commonly reported: over 60% of schools operate out of shoddy buildings. It 
is time that the school authorities took action. 
Some people think that it is not worth providing decent facilities for children. 
They think that youngsters are too yobbish to take care of expensive resources. 
But I say, how are children ever to learn to value such resources, if they never 
encounter them? 
NOW MOVE ONTO PERSUASION
Have you ever asked yourself why school are so shoddily equipped? Do you want 
your children to be educated in buildings as dreary as the ones you attended? Or 
are you prepared to stand up and demand that something is done? 
The citizens of a rich and modern state deserve up-to-date conditions in which 
to study and work. Your children are the future citizens of such a state and if 
we want their best efforts and loyalty to the nation, we must show them that we 
value them. How better to do this, than to provide them with schools fit for the 
21st century? Didn’t the last Labour government realise this when they started 
the Building Schools for the Future project? What a pity that the money ran out 
in the recession.
We’re coming out of that now. If we all pull together we can make change 
happen. The minimum that our children deserve is this: attractive, airy buildings 
with no hiding-room for bullies; adequate indoor and outdoor recreational space; 
appealing eating areas, offering a variety of good value, high quality meals and 
snacks; sufficient hygienic and well-maintained toilet facilities that no-one 
wastes time in queues. Surely you would not settle for less for your children? 
Let us demand from our politicians that they tell us what plans they have to 
improve schools. If they cannot answer to our satisfaction, then we will not elect 
them.
CONCLUSION 
Undoubtedly we are agreed that something must be done. Indeed, we are agreed 
on what must be done. Politicians will try to block us by pleading poverty and 
putting off the time for action. Do not be deflected. If we act now to insist on 
upgraded school conditions, our children will thrive; if we do not, they will suffer 
and may never forgive us. Ladies and gentlemen, use your influence now. Our 
children’s future depends upon it.
Using the following mark scheme, assess sample answer and give it 
two marks: one for AO4, out of 27, and one for AO5, out of 18.
▼  MARKING AN ANSWER
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
206
MARK SCHEME FOR AO4 (UP TO 27 MARKS)
Level 3: 12–17 marks
 
◼
Communicates clearly. 
 
◼
Expectations/requirements of the intended reader. 
 
◼
Appropriate use of form, tone and register. 
Level 4: 18–22 marks
 
◼
Communicates successfully. 
 
◼
A secure realisation of the writing task according to the writer’s purpose 
and the expectations/requirements of the intended reader is shown. 
 
◼
Effective use of form, tone and register.
Level 5: 23–27 marks
 
◼
Communication is perceptive and subtle. 
 
◼
Task is sharply focused on purpose and the expectations/requirements 
of the intended reader. 
 
◼
Sophisticated control of text structure, skilfully sustained paragraphing 
as appropriate and/or assured application of a range of cohesive 
devices.
MARK SCHEME FOR AO5 (UP TO 18 MARKS)
Level 3: 8–11 marks
 
◼
Develops and connects appropriate information and ideas; structural 
and grammatical features and paragraphing make the meaning clear.
 
◼
Uses accurate and varied punctuation, adapting sentence structure as 
appropriate.
Level 4: 12–15 marks
 
◼
Manages information and ideas, with structural and grammatical 
features used cohesively and deliberately across the text.
 
◼
Positions a range of punctuation for clarity, managing sentence 
structures for deliberate effect.
Level 5: 16–18 marks
 
◼
Manipulates complex ideas, utilising a range of structural and 
grammatical features to support coherence and cohesion.
 
◼
Uses extensive vocabulary strategically; rare spelling errors do not 
detract from overall meaning.
 
◼
Punctuates writing with accuracy to aid emphasis and precision, using 
a range of sentence structures accurately and selectively to achieve 
particular effects.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 1
TRANSACTIONAL WRITING
207
Now read the following sample answer and mark it the same way that 
you marked the previous sample answer. Remember to give it one mark 
for AO4, out of 27, and a second mark for AO5, out of 18.
…. Why is school so badly equipped? Do you want your children to be 
educated in buildings as boring as the ones you attended? Perhaps you 
should be willing to try to take some action to improve the situation.
The people of a rich and modern state need up-to-date conditions in their 
schools. Your children are the future of this country and we need to show 
them that we value them. 
So we need schools fit for the 21st century? We’ve got a few, but where 
are the rest?
What we want is: spacious buildings we’re not always bumping into 
peoples; plenty of space outdoors too; good food and snacks; better toilet 
facilities – these are what you’d like for your children. 
If we do something about it we can make things happen. We need to get 
our politicians to improve schools, but if they don’t come up with the 
goods, then we don’t have to elect them.
▼  MARKING AN ANSWER
ACTIVITY 3
The government is encouraging debate on how to tackle the problem 
of poor diet and lack of exercise. Write an article explaining some of the 
actions that they could take and arguing that they should do so quickly 
and effectively.
▼  PRACTISE YOUR WRITING
ACTIVITY 4
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING
KEY POINT
Include a clear and urgent call to 
action. The writing can be figurative, 
but make sure it is imperative.
▲ Poor diet and lack of exercise is a problem 
in the UK
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
209
PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
209
POETRY AND PROSE 
TEXTS AND IMAGINATIVE 
WRITING
PAPER 2
209
Assessment Objective 1 
Read and understand a 
variety of texts, selecting and 
interpreting information, ideas 
and perspectives
Assessment Objective 2 
Understand and analyse how 
writers use linguistic and 
structural devices to achieve 
their effects
Assessment Objective 4 
Communicate effectively and 
imaginatively, adapting form, 
tone and register of writing 
for specific purposes and 
audiences
Assessment Objective 5 
Write clearly, using a range 
of vocabulary and sentence 
structures, with appropriate 
paragraphing and accurate 
spelling, grammar and 
punctuation
In Paper 2, the assessment 
objectives are worth the 
following amounts:
AO1 – 8%
AO2 – 12%
AO4 – 12%
AO5 – 8%
This chapter focuses on Paper 2: Poetry and Prose Texts 
and Imaginative Writing of the English Language A course. 
Working through these lessons and activities will help you to 
develop the reading and writing skills that you will need for 
the Paper 2 exam.
The chapter is split into the following sections:
◼	Fiction texts
◼	Text anthology: Poetry and prose texts
◼	Imaginative writing.
Paper 2 is worth 40% of the total marks for the course and is 
split into two sections:
◼	Section A: Poetry and prose texts
◼	Section B: Imaginative writing.
In section A of your exam you will need to be able to meet 
the Assessment Objectives, AO1 and AO2.
In section B of your exam you will need to be able to meet the Assessment Objectives, AO4 and AO5.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
210
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to: 
 
◼
to begin reading and 
interpreting poetry and prose 
texts. 
APPROACHING PROSE
When you read a prose text, start thinking about it by asking yourself the 
following questions. 
 
◼
How is the story told? 
 
◼
Who is telling it? 
 
◼
Where is it located? 
Next, considering the features of the text will help you to analyse what the 
writer is doing. These could include: 
 
◼
setting
 
◼
narrative perspective
 
◼
characterisation
 
◼
descriptive techniques
 
◼
effect, or how it makes the reader feel
 
◼
possible interpretation or interpretations of the text’s implicit meanings.
APPROACHING POETRY
When you read a poem, you should also start by considering some questions:
 
◼
What is it about?
 
◼
How does it make you feel?
 
◼
What does it mean to you personally?
Them, consider how the poet communicates meaning and feeling. This could 
be achieved by:
 
◼
imagery
 
◼
linguistic techniques
 
◼
rhythm and rhyme
 
◼
structure and form
 
◼
possible interpretation or interpretations of the text’s implicit  meaning.
In the fiction Anthology, you will read a variety of poetry and 
prose extracts. You will need to analyse and interpret them in 
order to answer questions in the exam.
TYPES OF TEXT
▶
▶
▼  LINES WRITTEN IN EARLY SPRING
I heard a thousand blended notes, 
While in a grove I sate reclined, 
In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts 
Bring sad thoughts to the mind.
To her fair works did nature link 
The human soul that through me ran; 
 
 
 
 
5
KEY POINT
It is useful to have a series of questions 
in your mind when approaching any 
prose text. These are examples, but 
you can think of more.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
211
And much it grieved my heart to think 
What man has made of man.
Through primrose-tufts, in that sweet bower, 
The periwinkle trailed its wreathes; 
And ‘tis my faith that every flower 
Enjoys the air it breathes.
The birds around me hopped and played: 
Their thoughts I cannot measure, 
But the least motion which they made, 
It seemed a thrill of pleasure.
The budding twigs spread out their fan, 
To catch the breezy air; 
And I think, do all I can, 
That there was pleasure there.
If I these thoughts may not prevent, 
If such be of my creed the plan, 
Have I not reason to lament 
What man has made of man?
‘Lines written in Early Spring’ is a famous poem by British poet, William 
Wordsworth. It was first published in 1798 and explores the speaker’s 
thoughts on nature and their surroundings before focusing on darker 
thoughts about humanity. Read the poem carefully, then answer the 
following questions:
1 What do you think of the poem?
2 Which words or phrases do you particularly like?
3 Why are these words or phrases effective?
4 Where is the poem set?
5 Who is the narrator and what are they like?
6 What themes does the poem explore? 
7 Write three Point-Evidence-Explain paragraphs exploring the ways in 
which the author presents nature.
▼  APPROACHING POETRY
ACTIVITY 1
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
 
20 
 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
▲ Caption to be supplied
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
212
The following poems are excellent examples of how metaphor can be used in 
poetry. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how to identify 
figurative language 
 
◼
consider how figurative 
language is used for effect in 
creating character, atmosphere 
and emotion.
Figurative language is used to create powerful imagery in texts. 
It can be used by writers or poets to create atmosphere, mood, 
tone and emotion, or to add to our understanding of descriptions 
of character or setting. 
Figurative language works by making comparisons between two 
things. It therefore provides the reader with a strong visual image 
to identify with. The most common figurative techniques are 
metaphor, simile and personification.  
FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE
FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN POETRY
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
metaphor the transfer of a quality 
or attribute from one thing or idea to 
another in such a way as to imply some 
resemblance between the two things or 
ideas: ‘his eyes blazed’ implies that his 
eyes became like a fire
simile similar to a metaphor, a description 
that says that an object is like an image 
rather than that it is the image 
personification when something which 
is not human is made to sound human by 
attributing human qualities to it.
▶
Look at the photos and write your own figurative descriptions of each. 
For example: The amber flames leapt and danced. ‘Leapt’ and ‘danced’ 
are personification, emphasising the active nature of the fire and 
likening it to a person dancing. The beach was like a white ribbon of 
paper. This simile conveys the colour and shape of the beach.
▼  USING FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, INNOVATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
213
KEY POINT
Similes and metaphors are sometimes 
confused. Remember that similes 
compare using ‘like’ or ‘as’, while 
metaphors make a more direct 
comparison of one thing to another. For 
example, ‘She’s as fierce as a tiger’ is 
a simile, but ‘She’s a tiger when she’s 
angry.’ is a metaphor.
▼  ‘LOVE IS...’ BY ADRIAN HENRI
Love is feeling cold in the back of vans 
Love is a fanclub with only two fans 
Love is walking holding paintstained hands 
Love is.
Love is fish and chips on winter nights 
Love is blankets full of strange delights 
Love is when you don’t put out the light 
Love is
Love is the presents in Christmas shops 
Love is when you’re feeling Top of the Pops 
Love is what happens when the music stops 
Love is
Love is white panties lying all forlorn 
Love is pink nightdresses still slightly warm 
Love is when you have to leave at dawn 
Love is
Love is you and love is me 
Love is prison and love is free 
Love’s what’s there when you are away from me 
Love is...
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
20 
▼  ‘VALENTINE’ BY CAROL ANN DUFFY
Not a red rose or a satin heart.
I give you an onion. 
It is a moon wrapped in brown paper. 
It promises light 
like the careful undressing of love.
Here.  
It will blind you with tears  
like a lover. 
It will make your reflection 
a wobbling photo of grief.
I am trying to be truthful.
Not a cute card or a kissogram.
I give you an onion. 
Its fierce kiss will stay on your lips, 
possessive and faithful 
as we are, 
for as long as we are.
Take it. 
Its platinum loops shrink to a wedding-ring, 
if you like.
Lethal. 
Its scent will cling to your fingers, 
cling to your knife.
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
20 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
214
FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN PROSE
Settings can be used in a text to suggest a mood, ideas or feelings that are 
important to our wider reading of a text. Read the following extract carefully, 
considering the way in which the setting is described. 
▼   FROM LORD OF THE FLIES, BY WILLIAM GOLDING
Ralph disentangled himself cautiously and stole away through the 
branches. In a few seconds the fat boy’s grunts were behind him and he 
was hurrying towards the screen that laid between him and the lagoon. 
He climbed over a broken trunk and was out of the jungle.
The shore was fledged with palm trees. These stood or leaned or 
reclined against the light and their green feathers were a hundred feet 
up in the air. The ground beneath them was a bank covered with coarse 
grass, torn everywhere by the upheavals of fallen trees, scattered with 
decaying coconuts and palm saplings. Behind this was the darkness of 
the forest proper and the open space of the scar. Ralph stood, one hand 
against a grey trunk, and screwed up his eyes against the shimmering 
water. Out there, perhaps a mile away, the white surf flinked on a 
coral reef, and beyond that the open sea was a dark blue. Within the 
irregular arc of the coral lagoon was still as a mountain lake – blue 
of all the shades a shadowy green and purple. The beach between the 
palm terrace and the water was a thin bow stave, endless apparently, 
for to Ralph’s left the perspectives of palm and beach and water drew 
to a point at infinity; and always, almost visible was the heat. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
15
▲ Golding sets his story on a remote Pacific 
island
1 Read ‘Love is...’ and ‘Valentine’. What similarities and differences can 
you find between the two poems’ uses of metaphor? 
2 Write your own metaphorical poem. Start with the words, ‘All 
the world’s a…’. Write it in pairs of lines, each pair introducing a 
metaphor and then explaining its relevance. For example:
All the world’s a rollercoaster,
It spins around, its ups and downs…
▼  USING FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN POETRY
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, REASONING, INTERPRETATION, 
DECISION MAKING, CREATIVITY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
215
DID YOU KNOW? 
Pathetic fallacy is very similar to 
personification. It is usually used to make 
inanimate objects or things reflect what 
is going on in the scene. For example, if 
the weather is hot and sunny, it usually 
represents a ‘happy’ story. If the weather 
is dark, cold and stormy, you can usually 
guess that something bad is going to 
happen. 
1 Annotate the extract from Lord of the Flies, considering the following 
two questions.
 
▶ How is the island described? How is the setting outside the island 
described? Do you think these places might be symbolic?
 
▶ How does the way in which this contrast is set up make the reader 
feel about the novel?
2 Make a Socratic circle and discuss the following question as a class.
 
▶ The island is described as ‘torn everywhere’ by uprooted trees and 
shadowed by the ‘darkness of the forest’. Does Golding’s juxtaposition 
of this with the beautiful ‘white surf’ and ‘coral lagoon’ around it 
forewarn the reader of the events about to unfold?
▼  THINKING ABOUT FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE IN PROSE
ACTIVITY 3
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
symbolic existing to represent a concept 
or idea
juxtaposition placing two things together 
in order to create a contrasting effect
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
Write a short descriptive passage that gives a sense of place. You are 
not allowed to name the place, or say where it is. Concentrate on using 
language to describe it indirectly. Swap passages with a partner. Can 
you guess the place that your partner has described?
▼  A SENSE OF PLACE
ACTIVITY 4
KEY POINT
Use appropriate literary devices to 
engage your reader in feeling a sense 
of the place you have chosen.
DID YOU KNOW? 
Socratic circle: the rules
 
◼
Divide your class into two groups to 
make a Socratic circle.
 
◼
The inner circle sits around desks 
and discusses the question amongst 
themselves. Only one person may 
speak at a time. Use an object to 
indicate who has the power to speak 
at any given moment.
 
◼
The outer circle must remain silent, 
but should take notes. Whose 
argument is the most persuasive? Who 
do you disagree with? Why?
 
◼
The inner circle should now be silent. 
The outer circle may now assess the 
inner circle’s response, praising good 
points and adding suggestions or 
extending other points. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
216
It is often said that first impressions are the most important, and this is often 
true of fictional characters. The following extract from Christopher Isherwood’s 
novel Goodbye to Berlin introduces the memorable and quirky character Sally 
Bowles. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand and analyse how 
writers introduce characters
 
◼
develop fictional characters in 
their writing 
 
◼
understand how writers 
develop and use setting and 
atmosphere.
Creating characters is not an easy job. Good writers carefully 
reveal aspects of a character’s personality through a combination 
of description, behaviour and dialogue. 
CREATING CHARACTER, ATMOSPHERE AND EMOTION 
▶
The best way to approach character is to put yourself in someone else’s 
shoes or, in this case, pocket!
Create an imaginary character. Think of a few details about them such 
as their name, age and job. Now imagine which objects they might 
carry in their pocket or bag. Write down or draw at least three of these 
and put them into an envelope. You have now created your character’s 
‘pocket’ or ‘bag’. 
Swap envelopes with a partner. Remove the items from your partner’s 
envelope, one item at a time. Try to imagine what kind of person would 
own these items. Share your ideas with your partner.
Write a short paragraph about the character that your partner created, 
using some of the items in their ‘pocket’ to develop the character.
▼  WHAT’S IN YOUR POCKET? 
ACTIVITY 1
INTRODUCING A CHARACTER
▼   FROM GOODBYE TO BERLIN BY CHRISTOPHER 
ISHERWOOD
A few minutes later, Sally herself arrived.
“Am I terribly late, Fritz darling?”
“Only half of an hour, I suppose”, Fritz drawled, beaming with 
proprietary pleasure. “May I introduce Mr Isherwood – Miss 
Bowles? Mr Isherwood is commonly known as Chris.”
“I’m not,” I said. “Fritz is about the only person who’s ever called me 
Chris in my life.” 
Sally laughed. She was dressed in black silk, with a small cape over 
her shoulders and a little cap like a page-boy’s stuck jauntily on one 
side of her head:
 
 
5
 
 
 
10 
▶
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
▲ The things we always carry around with us 
can reveal our character
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
217
“Do you mind if I use your telephone, sweet?”
“Sure. Go right ahead.” Fritz caught my eye. “Come into the other 
room, Chris. I want to show you something.” He was evidently 
longing to hear my first impressions of Sally, his new acquisition. 
“For heaven’s sake, don’t leave me alone with this man!” she 
exclaimed. “Or he’ll seduce me down the telephone. He’s most 
terribly passionate.”
As she dialed the number, I noticed that her finger-nails were painted 
emerald green, a colour unfortunately chosen, for it called attention 
to her hands, which were much stained by cigarette-smoking and as 
dirty as a little girl’s. She was dark enough to be Fritz’s sister. Her 
face was long and thin, powdered dead white. She had very large 
brown eyes which should have been darker, to match her hair and the 
pencil she used for her eyebrows.
“Hilloo,” she cooed, pursing her brilliant cherry lips as though she 
were going to kiss the mouthpiece: “Ist das Du, mein Liebling?” Her 
mouth opened in a fatuously sweet smile. Fritz and I sat watching 
her, like a performance at the theatre.
 
 
15 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
Read the extract from Goodbye to Berlin. How does Isherwood build up 
a vivid sense of character in this extract? Consider his use of colour, the 
use of direct speech and any desciptions using adjectives and adverbs. 
Write at least two Point-Evidence-Explain paragraphs about this.
▼  BUILDING A SENSE OF CHARACTER
ACTIVITY 2
Consider the following prompts to help extend your understanding of 
characters. You can apply this to the Anthology texts.
How they appear to others: What kinds of words are used to describe their 
features, build and clothing? What does the writer want to suggest to the 
reader about the character’s behaviour, attitude or interests? 
What they do: What can the reader guess about the characters from their 
actions and behaviour? 
What they say: Does the writer use direct speech? What does this tell us 
about what the character thinks, feels or is likely to do?  
▶
CONSIDERING CHARACTER
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, ANALYSIS,  
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
KEY POINT
The introduction of a new fictional 
character is a key moment. The 
language you choose lays the 
foundations for filling out the character 
later.
Using the techniques that you have considered, write your own short, 
vivid character description that begins with the description of your 
character’s shoes. You could choose to develop your character based 
on the character created in Activity 1 or start with a new idea.
▼  CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT
ACTIVITY 3
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
218
How they say it: How does the writer make the character speak? Are they 
always talking about the same thing? Do they have a particular way of talking, 
e.g. dialect, tone? What is the writer saying about their background, feelings or 
interests?
What other characters say or think about them: How are we made to see 
them through other people’s eyes? Do other characters like or dislike them, 
admire or despise them, trust or distrust them? Do we believe what others say 
about them? 
▶
Character is not unique to prose; poems often present us with strong 
and well-drawn characters. Consider ‘Dulce et Decorum Est’, by Wilfred 
Owen and answer the following questions.
1 Why does the poem’s subject remain nameless?
2 How is description of the man used to build up a strong visual image 
of him? 
3 What do the final two verses tell us about the man’s relationship with 
death?
4 How does the poem make you feel about the man? 
5 Why do you think Owen wrote this poem? 
▼  CHARACTERS IN POETRY
ACTIVITY 4
▼  DULCE ET DECORUM EST, BY WILFRED OWEN
Bent double, like old beggars under sacks,
Knock-kneed, coughing like hags, we cursed through sludge,
Till on the haunting flares we turned our backs,
And towards our distant rest began to trudge.
Men marched asleep. Many had lost their boots,
But limped on, blood-shod. All went lame; all blind;
Drunk with fatigue; deaf even to the hoots
Of gas-shells dropping softly behind.
Gas! GAS! Quick, boys!—An ecstasy of fumbling
Fitting the clumsy helmets just in time,
But someone still was yelling out and stumbling
And flound’ring like a man in fire or lime.—
Dim through the misty panes and thick green light,
As under a green sea, I saw him drowning.
5
10
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING, INTERPRETATION
KEY POINT
Understanding character is a critical 
part of analysing a text. Authors can 
convey meaning through characters’ 
words and actions and how they 
interact with each other. Characters 
can also be used to show how a writer 
feels about a bigger theme or issue.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
219
In all my dreams before my helpless sight,
He plunges at me, guttering, choking, drowning.
If in some smothering dreams, you too could pace
Behind the wagon that we flung him in,
And watch the white eyes writhing in his face,
His hanging face, like a devil’s sick of sin;
If you could hear, at every jolt, the blood
Come gargling from the froth-corrupted lungs,
Obscene as cancer, bitter as the cud
Of vile, incurable sores on innocent tongues,—
My friend, you would not tell with such high zest
To children ardent for some desperate glory,
The old Lie: Dulce et decorum est
Pro patria mori.
15
20
25
▲ Owen had deep empathy for his war 
comrades
SETTING AND ATMOSPHERE
The setting of a text can tell you a lot about the text and helps to create 
atmosphere. If a novel is set entirely in one room, it can evoke a tense, 
claustrophobic feeling. A poem featuring open countryside under clear skies 
could suggest feelings of freedom and opportunity.
CONSIDERING SETTING AND ATMOSPHERE
When approaching a new text, identify the setting and atmosphere more 
closely by considering the questions below. Does the writer:
 
◼
establish the sense of place, weather, time?
 
◼
create a particular atmosphere? For example, is it tense or mysterious?
 
◼
give details of the setting? How does this link with the atmosphere 
created?
 
◼
choose specific vocabulary to create mood? Can you find examples of 
nouns, adjectives, verbs which do this?
 
◼
use images or stage instructions to create effects? Are these linked to a 
subject or theme?
 
◼
link setting and mood to the action or characters’ feelings? For example, is 
a sad scene set in a rainy, windy, open space?
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
setting the place where something is or 
where something happens, and the general 
environment
atmosphere the feeling that an event or 
place gives you
KEY POINT
The setting and the atmosphere it 
evokes are important devices used by 
a writer in order to influence readers. 
Careful choice of language is important 
in conveying this.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING, INTERPRETATION
Look at the questions in the list above. Answer them in response to one 
of the fiction Anthology texts.
▼  SETTING
ACTIVITY 5
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
220
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to: 
 
◼
select and interpret 
information, ideas and 
perspectives 
 
◼
comment on the language 
used.
When considering a text, it is important to study and discuss 
the techniques and features of narratives, including style, plot, 
character, theme, viewpoint, tone and mood. A useful starting 
point is to consider the ‘voice’ which is used to tell the story. Is 
the story written in the first person (‘I’), or third person (written 
from an external perspective from the characters)? 
NARRATIVE VOICE
▶
CONSIDERING NARRATIVE VOICE
▼   FROM THE SALT ROAD BY JANE JOHNSON
When I was a child, I had a wigwam in our back garden: a circle of 
thin yellow cotton draped over a bamboo pole and pegged to the lawn. 
Every time my parents argued, that was where I went. I would lie on my 
stomach with my fingers in my ears and stare so hard at the red animals 
printed on its bright decorative border that after a while they began to 
dance and run, until I wasn’t in the garden any more but out on the plains, 
wearing a fringed deerskin tunic and feathers in my hair, just like the 
braves in the films I watched every Saturday morning in the cinema down 
the road.
Even at an early age I found it preferable to be outside in my little tent 
rather than inside the house. The tent was my space. It was as large as my 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
10
▶
When thinking about the narrative voice, consider these questions.
 
◼
Does the writer tell the story from a narrator’s point of view?
 
◼
Does the writer give the reader several different points of view? 
 
◼
What tone is used? For example, is it urgent, anxious, relaxed, excited?
 
◼
Do you get a sense of the narrator as a character? What details of their 
lives are suggested?
 
◼
Is the narrator writing the story about themselves?
 
◼
Can we trust the narrator? Are there any clues that we should not believe 
everything that they say?
 
◼
Is a setting and time period established? What kinds of words are used for 
this?
Whether a text is narrated in the first person or in the third person can 
have an impact on how a reader feels about the text. For example, a 
first-person narrative is more personal and a third-person narrative is 
more detached. Draw up a list of other differences between them.
▼  FIRST- AND THIRD-PERSON NARRATION:
ACTIVITY 1
DID YOU KNOW?
Second-person narration speaks directly 
to the reader, usually referring to them 
as ‘you’. This technique is not used very 
often but can make the reader feel part 
of the story as it invites involvement or 
agreement with the narrator.
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
first person written from the perspective of 
one person – that is, using ‘I’; this differs 
from the second person, which directly 
addresses the reader (‘you’), and the third 
person (‘he’, ‘she’ and ‘it’) 
third person using the third person – that 
is, ‘he’, ‘she’and ‘it’; this differs from the 
first person (‘I’) and the second person, 
which directly addresses the reader (‘you’)
narrator a character that tells the story in a 
novel, play, poem or film
? we have deleted the 
1st ‘to’ in the sentence? 
ie: ‘speaks directly to 
the reader’!
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
221
grandeur Grandness.
Georgian British style of architecture 
during the period 1714–1811.
archaeologists Scientists who study the 
past by looking at historical objects and 
sites.
unbiddable Will not be told what to do.
oddly attenuated Strangely long and thin. 
mannequins Models or dummies.
imagination, which was infinite. But the house, for all its grandeur 
and Georgian spaciousness, felt small and suffocating. It was stuffed 
with things, as well as with my mother and father’s bitterness. They 
were both archaeologists, my parents: lovers of the past, they had 
surrounded themselves with boxes of yellowed papers, ancient 
artefacts, dusty objects; the fragile, friable husks of lost civilizations. 
I never understood why they decided to have me: even the quietest 
baby, the most house-trained toddler, the most studious child, would 
have disrupted the artificial, museum-like calm they had wrapped 
around themselves. In that house they lived separated from the rest 
of the world, in a bubble in which dust motes floated silently like the 
fake snow in a snow-globe. I was not the child to complement such 
a life, being a wild little creature, loud and messy and unbiddable. I 
liked to play rough games with the boys instead of engaging in the 
sedate, codified exchanges of the other girls. I had dolls, but more 
often than not I beheaded or scalped them, or buried them in the 
garden and forgot where they were. I had no interest in making 
fashionable outfits for the oddly attenuated pink plastic mannequins 
with their insectile torsos and brassy hair that the other girls so 
worshipped and adorned.
15 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
30
Read the extract from The Salt Road by Jane Johnson. Highlight any 
information we get about the narrator in the passage. Then construct a 
P-E-E paragraph to answer the following question. 
 
▶ What sense of the narrator’s home life is suggested in this passage?
▼  ANALYSING A NARRATIVE VOICE
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
KEY POINT:
The narrative voice in a text is another 
key part of a text. The tone can help 
set the mood and atmosphere and 
the choice of first- or third-person 
narration can help shape how events 
are reported.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
222
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to: 
 
◼
understand how writers 
organise their work for effect. 
Writers often use a variety of interesting structural devices 
to arrange their prose or poems. In the exam, you need to be 
able to write about how the Anthology texts are organised, 
considering how structure contributes to your understanding and 
interpretation of the text.
STRUCTURE
▶
The simplest way to tell a story is in linear fashion, starting at the beginning 
and going on until you reach the end. When commenting on the structure of 
narrative, consider the following questions.
BEGINNINGS
 
◼
Is a setting or time period established? What kinds of words are used 
for this?  
 
◼
Is a character (or characters) introduced? Who are they? What do you 
learn about them?
 
◼
Is a theme suggested? What effect does this have on the reader?  
 
◼
Is there a narrator? Do they speak in a chorus or commentary (first or 
third person)? What is their tone of voice like? For example, is it urgent, 
anxious, relaxed, excited…?  
 
◼
Is dialogue used? What effect does it have on the reader? For example, is 
it entertaining, tense, fast-moving, thoughtful?  
 
◼
Is there a prevailing tense (past or present)? What effect does this 
have?
MIDDLES
 
◼
Is a problem introduced? How?  
 
◼
Are all the characters behaving the same way that they did at the 
beginning? Which ones have changed?  
 
◼
Has the setting changed? How does it fit in with the plot? Does it give 
added interest?  
 
◼
Are there clear links with earlier parts of the story or poem? What are 
they? Are they shown through words or actions?
 
◼
Does the writer suggest what is to come? How?   
ENDINGS
 
◼
Does the story or poem come to a definite end? Does the writer leave 
the reader to guess what happens?  
 
◼
Does the book end as you expected? Or is it a surprise, or even a shock, 
ending?  
 
◼
Does the end echo the opening? Do we return to the same theme, 
setting, characters, for example?  
 
◼
Is there a moral or message? Have the characters learned a lesson? 
Does the author want to tell the reader something?  
ANALYSING STRUCTURE
HINT
When analysing the structure of a text as a 
whole, consider the following questions.
• Is the structure linear or does it involve 
time-shifts?
• What narrative links are used to 
suggest a movement in time?
• Is there a contrast in the tone and 
mood between two parts of a text 
when time moves?
• How much is revealed about the 
characters at any one time? What do 
you learn about the characters when 
time moves?
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
narrative the story or plot
time-shift moving between different 
periods of time
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
223
▼   FROM MRS DALLOWAY BY VIRGINIA WOOLF
Mrs Dalloway said she would buy the flowers herself. For Lucy had 
her work cut out for her. The doors would be taken off their hinges; 
Rumplemayer’s men were coming. And then, thought Clarissa Dalloway, 
what a morning – fresh as if issued to children on a beach.
What a lark! What a plunge! For so it had always seemed to her when, with 
a squeak of the hinges, which she could hear now, whe had burst open the 
French windows and plunged at Bourton into the open air. How fresh, how 
calm, stiller than a wave; the kiss of a wave; chill and sharp and yet (for a 
girl of eighteen as she then was) solemn, feeling as she did, standing there at 
the open window, that something awful was about to happen; looking at the 
flowers, at the trees with the smoke winding off them and the rooks rising, 
falling; standing and – was that it? – “I prefer men to cauliflowers” – was 
that it? He must have said it at breakfast one morning when she had gone 
out on to the terrace – Peter Walsh. He would be back from India one of 
these days, June or July, she forgot which, for his letters were awfully dull; 
it was his sayings one remembered; his eyes, his pocket-knife, his smile, his 
grumpiness and, when millions of things had utterly vanished – how strange 
it was! – a few sayings like this about cabbages.
▶
Mrs Dalloway is a novel with an unusual structure. The technique used 
in which the thoughts and feelings that are running through the mind of 
a character are described is known as stream of consciousness. You 
can see from this piece how structure and narrative voice are linked.
Read the opening of the novel and answer the following questions.
 
◼
What is this passage about?
 
◼
How does the author show us what Mrs Dalloway is thinking?
 
◼
How do you feel about Mrs Dalloway at the end of the passage? 
Why?
▼  ANALYSING STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
Working in pairs, cut up the first part of any story into short phrases, 
place them in an envelope and swap them with another group.
Arrange the contents of your envelope into whatever order makes the 
most sense. Discuss this with your partner and explain your thinking. 
Try rearranging the story using different structures to produce different 
effects.
▼  CONSTRUCTING A NARRATIVE
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
TEAMWORK
DID YOU KNOW?
Some writers create interesting effects by 
handling time in a more fluid way and not 
relying on a simple beginning-middle-end 
structure. By using the technique of time-
shift, also known as prolepsis, narrative 
can work in a non-linear way. This allows 
the reader to make connections between 
widely separated events. Flashbacks 
to the past can change the reader’s 
interpretation of events and shifts forward 
can give you a glimpse of the future of the 
narrative.
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
prolepsis suggestions of things that will 
happen, before they do
flashbacks when the narrator of a story 
jumps out of the present in order to 
describe an event which happened in the 
past; often flashbacks are in the form of 
the memories of characters in the present
KEY POINT:
How a text is structured can influence 
your understanding of a text and 
your reaction to it. How and when 
information is revealed is important 
to both the plot and character 
development.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
224
STRUCTURE IN POETRY
Structure is important when analysing poetry too. You should think about the 
following:
 
◼
organisation of the stanzas
 
◼
line length
 
◼
punctuation
 
◼
rhyme
 
◼
rhythm
Consider how these might lend themselves to create different effects.
Robert Frost (1874–1963) was a popular and critically respected American 
poet. His poetry often tackles themes complicated themes about American 
people and society through the rural settings of New England where he spent 
most of his life. His work is also influenced by the grief and loss he suffered in 
his personal life. He won four Pulitzer Prizes for Poetry.
GENERAL VOCABULARY
New England an area in the north-east of 
the United States of America
STRUCTURE IN PROSE
NIGHT, BY ALICE MUNRO
Alice Munro (1931–) is a famous Canadian short story writer. She has won 
numerous literary awards, including the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2013. She 
is an innovative writer who made changes to the short story as a genre. Chief 
among these is the way she uses time shifts and moves the narrative forwards 
and backwards. Character development and how they are coping with life at 
different stages is often more important than plot in her stories.
Consider the structure of Alice Munro’s short story ‘Night’ (pp. xxx–
xxx). Using the series of questions on beginnings, middles and ends, 
comment on the story. In particular, think about the ending.
▼  ANALYSING STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
Like many writers, Alice Munro often makes revisions to her stories 
before they are published. Can you write an alternative ending to ‘Night’, 
considering the structural techniques that you have learned about in this 
unit? 
▼  AN ALTERNATIVE ENDING
ACTIVITY 3
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
225
Read ‘Out, Out—’ (page xxx–xxx. Make a note of anything that you 
notice about the structure of the poem. Consider the points in the bullet 
list above.
▼  LOOKING OUT FOR STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY 4
Re-read ‘Out, Out—’ and look out for the points that have just been 
discussed. Then write your own P-E-E paragraph about structure in the 
poem.
▼  WRITING ABOUT STRUCTURE IN POETRY
ACTIVITY 5
The poem consists of a single stanza. It is written in ‘blank verse’, with five 
stresses to a line, which is known formally as ‘iambic pentameter’. It also lacks 
a formal rhyme scheme. This form suits the conversational tone. The poem 
is realistic, shocking and dramatic, so consider how the construction of the 
poem helps to achieve these effects. 
The importance of the unusual title is something to be discussed. Particularly, 
the dash after the repeated word ‘out’ in the title indicates an unfinished 
statement. 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
▲ American poet Robert Frost
KEY POINT
Think how structure in poetry might 
lend itself to different effects. Focus 
on the stanzas, line length, rhyme and 
rhythm.
Review the stories in the Anthology. Which ones are retrospective or 
use time-shifts? Write a P-E-E paragraph about the narrative structure, 
considering the following tips.
 
◼
What narrative links are used to suggest a movement in time?
 
◼
How much is revealed about the characters? Using time-shift can 
give depth to a character, but can also be used to create a sense of 
mystery.
 
◼
Is there a strong contrast between the tone or mood of the 
paragraphs where time shifts? Is weather, setting or situation used 
to reinforce this sense of contrast?
▼  ANTHOLOGY TEXTS
ACTIVITY 6
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING, INTERPRETATION
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
retrospective written in the past tense
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
226
In order to succeed at this question in the exam you need to:
 
◼
show that you’ve understood what you’ve read by writing about the text in 
a way that shows that you’ve understood. You can do that by referring to 
the text and then commenting appropriately on what you’ve quoted
 
◼
choose suitable lines from the text to comment upon in support of your 
points
 
◼
show that you understand the way in which language is used in texts and 
how writers use language and structure to create meaning.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to: 
 
◼
prepare for the Paper 2 
examination
The question in Paper 2 Section A of the exam tests your reading 
and analytical skills. It is based on the fiction texts part of the 
Anthology.
PUTTING IT INTO PRACTICE
▶
KEY POINT
Exam essays should be fully developed 
not just in terms of length but in ideas. 
It is important that you pick out the key 
terms from the question and evaluate 
the text, rather than just pointing out 
features. You need to think and write 
about the effect of the use of distinctive 
features in an analytical manner.
In the exam you will be asked to respond to one of the fiction Anthology texts. 
There is only one question in Section A of the exam and you must answer it. 
The question is worth 30 marks.
In this section, you will be presented with a passage from a text and asked 
to analyse it in the way you will need to do in the exam. This will allow you to 
practice the skills that you have learned. In the exam you will only be asked to 
answer about a text from the Anthology, this is for illustrative purposes only.
UNDERSTANDING THE EXAM 
CRITERIA
▼   FROM THE NO.1 LADIES’ DETECTIVE AGENCY 
BY ALEXANDER MCCALL SMITH
Mma Ramotswe had a detective agency in Africa, at the foot of Kgale Hill. 
These were its assets: a tiny white van, two desks, two chairs, a telephone, 
and an old typewriter. Then there was a teapot, in which Mma Ramotswe – 
the only lady private detective in Botswana – brewed redbush tea. And three 
mugs – one for herself, one for her secretary, and one for the client. What 
else does a detective agency really need? Detective agencies rely on human 
intuition and intelligence, both of which Mma Ramotswe had in abundance. 
No inventory would ever include those, of course.
But there was also the view, which again could appear on no inventory. How 
could any such list describe what one saw when one looked out from Mma 
Ramotswe’s door? To the front, an acacia tree, the thorn tree which dots the 
wide edges of the Kalahari; the great white thorns, a warning; the olive-grey 
leaves, by contrast, so delicate. In its branches, in the late afternoon, or in the 
cool of the early morning, one might see a Go-Away Bird, or hear it, rather. 
And beyond the acacia, over the dusty road, the roofs of the town under a 
cover of trees and scrub bush; on the horizon, in a blue shimmer of heat, the 
hills, like improbable, overgrown termite-mounds.
▶
▲ Scene from the film of The No.1 Ladies’ 
Detective Agency
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
READING SKILLS: FICTION TEXTS
227
Everybody called her Mma Ramotswe, although if people had wanted 
to be formal, they would have addressed her as Mme Mma Ramotswe. 
This is the right thing for a person of stature, but which she had never used 
of herself. So it was always Mma Ramotswe, rather than Precious Ramotswe, 
a name which very few people employed.
She was a good detective, and a good woman. A good woman in a good 
country, one might say. She loved her country, Botswana, which is a place of 
peace, and she loved Africa, for all its trials. I am not ashamed to be called an 
African patriot, said Mma Ramotswe. I love all the people whom God made, 
but I especially know how to love the people who live in this place. They are 
my people, my brothers and sisters. It is my duty to help them to solve the 
mysteries in their lives. That is what I am called to do.
In idle moments, when there were no pressing matters to be dealt with, and 
when everybody seemed to be sleepy from the heat, she would sit under her 
acacia tree. It was a dusty place to sit, and the chickens would occasionally 
come and peck about her feet, but it was a place which seemed to encourage 
thought. It was here that Mma Ramotswe would contemplate some of the 
issues which, in everyday life, may so easily be pushed to one side.
Everything, thought Mma Ramotswe, has been something before. Here I am, 
the only lady private detective in the whole of Botswana, sitting in front of 
my detective agency. But only a few years ago there was no detective agency, 
and before that, before there were even any buildings here, there were just 
the acacia trees, and the river-bed in the distance, and the Kalahari over 
there, so close.
In those days there was no Botswana even, just the Bechuanaland 
Protectorate, and before that again there was Khama’s Country, and lions 
with the dry wind in their manes. But look at it now: a detective agency, right 
here in Gaborone, with me, the fat lady detective, sitting outside and thinking 
these thoughts about how what is one thing today becomes quite another 
thing tomorrow.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS 
Read the extract from The No. 1 Ladies’ Detective Agency.
How does the author suggest that life is not easy for the narrator? 
In your answer, you should write about:
 
◼
the imagery 
 
◼
the use of language. 
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
REASONING, INTERPRETATION
The writer suggests that life is not easy for the narrator by giving us a detailed look 
at Mma Ramotswe’s life. This is evident when the narrator says she only has ‘a tiny 
white van, two desks, two chairs’. The asyndetic listing and adjectival description 
emphasise her limited number of possessions, which are ‘old’ and ‘tiny’. The word 
‘tiny’ suggests that it is too small for comfort, while ‘old’ implies that Mma Ramotswe 
does not have the money for new possessions. The author uses emotive language to 
demonstrate how much Mma Ramotswe appreciates the smaller things in life, such 
as the view and her surroundings.
HINT: 
Use this paragraph to get you started.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
228
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 You can find out more about Wilfred Owen and his poetry from 
reference books or on the internet. You could read some more of his 
poems, which will help you to understand his attitudes to war and how 
he wrote about it.
2 How would you feel about living with a physical disability such as the 
loss of a limb. What attitudes to people with disabilities do you find in 
your society?
3 What can you find out about the kinds of injuries that soldiers suffered 
in the First World War and the way in which they were treated when they 
returned from the front?
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Wilfred Owen is the best known of the English poets who wrote 
about their experiences of the First World War (1914–1918). These 
experiences had deep effects on the writers, and cost many of 
them their lives. Owen was strongly influenced by another officer 
and poet called Siegfried Sassoon. They met at Craiglockhart 
Hospital where they had both been sent to recover from shell-
shock. Owen twice said that his theme was ‘war and the pity of 
war’. Having returned to his regiment after his time in hospital, 
he died in battle in November 1918, just seven days before the 
armistice brought the war to an end on 11th November 1918.
‘DISABLED’
WILFRED OWEN
▶
▼  ‘DISABLED’ BY WILFRED OWEN
He sat in a wheeled chair, waiting for dark,
And shivered in his ghastly suit of grey,
Legless, sewn short at elbow. Through the park
Voices of boys rang saddening like a hymn,
Voices of play and pleasure after day,
Till gathering sleep had mothered them from him.
About this time Town used to swing so gay
When glow-lamps budded in the light blue trees,
And girls glanced lovelier as the air grew dim, –
In the old times, before he threw away his knees.
Now he will never feel again how slim
5
10 
▶
▲ Owen said his writing was about ‘war and the 
pity of war’
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
229
Esprit de corps French expression 
meaning a feeling of pride.
Girls’ waists are, or how warm their subtle hands.
All of them touch him like some queer disease.
There was an artist silly for his face,
For it was younger than his youth, last year.
Now, he is old; his back will never brace;
He’s lost his colour very far from here,
Poured it down shell-holes till the veins ran dry,
And half his lifetime lapsed in the hot race
And leap of purple spurted from his thigh.
One time he liked a blood-smear down his leg,
After the matches, carried shoulder-high.
It was after football, when he’d drunk a peg,
He thought he’d better join. – He wonders why.
Someone had said he’d look a god in kilts,
That’s why; and maybe, too, to please his Meg,
Aye, that was it, to please the giddy jilts
He asked to join. He didn’t have to beg;
Smiling they wrote his lie: aged nineteen years.
Germans he scarcely thought of; all their guilt,
And Austria’s, did not move him. And no fears
Of Fear came yet. He thought of jewelled hilts
For daggers in plaid socks; of smart salutes;
And care of arms; and leave; and pay arrears;
Esprit de corps; and hints for young recruits.
And soon, he was drafted out with drums and cheers.
Some cheered him home, but not as crowds cheer Goal.
Only a solemn man who brought him fruits
Thanked him; and then enquired about his soul.
Now, he will spend a few sick years in institutes,
15
20
25
30
35
40
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
230
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
Owen’s wounded soldier, who has lost his legs and his arms, sits in a 
wheelchair in hospital listening to the shouts of boys playing at sunset. He is 
reminded of the excitement of former early evenings in town before he joined 
up; ‘before he threw away his knees’.
Copy and complete the table, selecting some key phrases that show the 
soldier’s present situation and his memories. Write a comment on each. 
▼ PHRASE
▼ COMMENT
‘waiting for dark’ 
 
The soldier does not have anything 
positive to look forward to – only the 
arrival of the end of the day.
‘sewn short at elbow’ 
The sleeves of his suit have had to be cut 
short because of the loss of his arms.
‘Town used to swing so gay’ 
The evening had been a time for 
happiness and parties in town.
‘glow-lamps budded in the light blue 
trees’
 
‘his back will never brace’ 
  
‘Poured it down shell-holes’ 
  
‘lapsed in the hot race’ 
  
‘He thought of jewelled hilts / For daggers 
in plaid socks’
 
‘soon, he was drafted out with drums and 
cheers’
 
‘not as crowds cheer Goal’ 
  
‘do what things the rules consider wise’ 
Owen chose his words carefully to help us understand the mind of the soldier. 
Copy and complete the following table, making explanatory comments on the 
examples from the poem.
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
And do what things the rules consider wise,
And take whatever pity they may dole.
Tonight he noticed how the women’s eyes
Passed from him to the strong men that were whole.
How cold and late it is! Why don’t they come
And put him into bed? Why don’t they come?
45
KEY POINT
This is a text that blends the past and 
present to powerful effect. Analyse how 
Owen achieves this.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
231
▼ EXAMPLE 
▼ EXPLANATION
‘he liked a blood-smear down his leg’ 
 
A slight injury or graze from playing 
football was something he could feel 
proud of, a type of ‘war wound’.
‘look a god in kilts’
 
‘to please the giddy jilts’
 
‘he noticed how the women’s eyes / Passed 
from him’ 
He realises that girls look away from him 
in horror or embarrassment and turn their 
attention to healthy, able-bodied men.
‘How cold and late it is!’
 
‘Why don’t they come… Why don’t they 
come?’
The repeated rhetorical question shows 
how much he wishes to get away from 
the sights and thoughts that have been 
troubling him (end of day / end of life).
There are also some striking phrases that convey Owen’s powerful ideas. 
Copy and complete the following table, adding your own comments to show 
why you find the language effective in the examples listed and adding more 
examples of your own.
▼ EXAMPLE 
▼ EXPLANATION
‘saddening like a hymn’ 
 
Even the happy cries of children sound 
sad to him, like a mournful hymn in 
church.
‘girls glanced lovelier’
 
‘touch him like some queer disease’
 
‘Thanked him; and then enquired about 
his soul’
 
‘spend a few sick years in institutes’
 
How successfully does the writer compare the ideas of sport and war in 
‘Disabled’?
In your answer, you should write about:
 
◼
the effects of war
 
◼
the present and past attitudes of the disabled soldier
 
◼
the writer’s imagery and use of colour
 
◼
the use of contrast
 
◼
the writer’s use of words, phrases and techniques.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
Write an article in which you describe the lives of the wounded soldiers 
who are being cared for in an institution.
▼  WRITING TASK
ACTIVITY 1
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
AO1
AO2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
232
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 You can find out more about Robert Frost and his poetry from reference 
books or on the internet. You could read some more of his poems, 
which will help you to understand the sort of subjects that he wrote 
about. These include ‘Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening’, 
‘Mending Wall’, and ‘Meeting and Passing’.
2 Think about the way a newspaper would describe this tragic event in 
comparison with how the poet presents the incident.
BACKGROUND
Robert Frost (1874–1963) was one of the major American poets 
of the 20th century. His poetry is based mainly on the life and 
scenery of rural New England. ‘Out, Out –’ was published in the 
collection Mountain Interval in 1916.
The setting of this poem is a farm. The scenery around the farm 
is beautiful, life is too hard for it to be enjoyed fully by the family, 
even by the young son, who has to work all day cutting up wood 
with a buzz saw. It is believed that Frost based the poem on a real 
incident that he read about in a newspaper.
‘OUT, OUT —’
ROBERT FROST
▼  ‘OUT, OUT—’ BY ROBERT FROST
The buzz saw snarled and rattled in the yard
And made dust and dropped stove-length sticks of wood,
Sweet-scented stuff when the breeze drew across it.
And from there those that lifted eyes could count
Five mountain ranges one behind the other
Under the sunset far into Vermont.
And the saw snarled and rattled, snarled and rattled,
As it ran light, or had to bear a load.
And nothing happened: day was all but done.
Call it a day, I wish they might have said
To please the boy by giving him the half hour
That a boy counts so much when saved from work.
His sister stood beside them in her apron
To tell them ‘Supper.’ At the word, the saw,
As if to prove saws knew what supper meant,
▶
▶
5
10
15
▲ Frost’s poetry draws upon life in rural New 
England, USA
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
233
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
The title of the poem is from Shakespeare’s Macbeth, Act V Scene IV. The 
following speech is given by Macbeth when he learns of the death of Lady 
Macbeth, his wife.
ether An anaesthetic gas used in the 19th 
and early 20th century.
Leaped out at the boy’s hand, or seemed to leap–
He must have given the hand. However it was,
Neither refused the meeting. But the hand!
The boy’s first outcry was a rueful laugh,
As he swung toward them holding up the hand,
Half in appeal, but half as if to keep
The life from spilling. Then the boy saw all–
Since he was old enough to know, big boy
Doing a man’s work, though a child at heart–
He saw all spoiled. ‘Don’t let him cut my hand off–
The doctor, when he comes. Don’t let him, sister!’
So. But the hand was gone already.
The doctor put him in the dark of ether.
He lay and puffed his lips out with his breath.
And then–the watcher at his pulse took fright.
No one believed. They listened at his heart.
Little–less–nothing!–and that ended it.
No more to build on there. And they, since they
Were not the one dead, turned to their affairs.
20
25
30
She should have died hereafter;
There would have been a time for such a word.
To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
To the last syllable of recorded time;
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player,
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more. It is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.
5
10
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
234
Think about the way in which Frost makes use of the quotation from Macbeth 
and in particular why the reference to death as life’s ‘brief candle’ going out 
might apply particularly to the situation that Frost describes in the poem.
Frost generally uses straightforward vocabulary, but ‘Out, Out—’ contains 
some difficult phrases. These are listed in the following table. Copy and 
complete the table with explanations of these difficult phrases to develop your 
understanding of the poem.
▼ LANGUAGE 
▼ EXPLANATION
‘stove-length sticks of wood’ 
Logs the right size to put in a wood-
burning stove.
‘As it ran light’ 
When it ran freely because it was not 
cutting anything difficult.
‘As if to prove saws knew what supper 
meant’
 
‘Neither refused the meeting’
 
‘put him in the dark of ether’
 
‘the watcher at his pulse took fright’
 
‘No more to build on there’
Word choice in poetry is often used to create vivid impressions. Frost uses 
a wide range of techniques to create striking images, build atmosphere and 
engage the reader. By analysing the language features used, it is possible to 
explore Frost’s writing style and appreciate the ways in which he adds depth to 
the narrative within the poem. Copy and complete the following table, finding 
examples of each of the techniques and saying what you think the effect is. 
▼  LANGUAGE TECHNIQUE
▼ EXAMPLE
▼ EFFECT
Personification 
‘The buzz saw snarled 
and rattled’
Makes the machine seem 
like a savage beast.
Onomatopoeia
 
 
Alliteration
 
 
Oxymoron
 
 
Direct speech
 
 
Repetition
 
 
Short sentence  
idiom, pathos, dissonance, 
colloquialism
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
▲ Word choice in poetry is often used to create 
vivid impressions
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
235
How does the writer create a sense of horror in ‘Out, Out—’?
In your answer, you should write about:
 
◼
the way in which the chainsaw is presented
 
◼
the way in which the seriousness of the situation is gradually revealed
 
◼
the poet’s use of words, phrases and techniques.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
Although the boy is shown to be part of a family, he also seems quite 
isolated in the poem, and there is little sympathy for the rest of the 
family’s attitudes. What does the poem’s language show us about:
 
◼
the boy’s sister
 
◼
the relationships within the family
 
◼
the family’s reactions to the boy’s tragic early death?
Copy and complete the table with examples of language referring to the 
above points, explaining what each example shows us.
▼  LANGUAGE REFERRING 
TO FAMILY
▼  WHAT DOES THIS SHOW US?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▼  READING BETWEEN THE LINES
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
SKILLS
TEAMWORK, EMPATHY
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
KEY POINT
The language of this poem articulates 
ideas indirectly. Draw out how the 
substance of the poem is the ‘un-said’.
Work with a partner, imagining that one of you is a police officer and 
that the other is a member of the family who actually saw the accident, 
describing the event to the police officer. In your roles, conduct an 
interview to investigate the circumstances of the accident.
▼  EXPLAINING THE ACCIDENT
ACTIVITY 2
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
AO1
AO2
Write an article on the dangers to children of undertaking adult work, 
persuading people to adhere to health and safety advice.
▼  WRITING TASK
ACTIVITY 3
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
236
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 You can find out more about Moniza Alvi and her poetry from reference 
books or on the internet. You could read some more of her poems, 
such as ‘Presents from my Aunts’, which will help you to understand her 
attitudes toward her Pakistani heritage.
2 Think about what Moniza Alvi says about her background and its links 
to her poetry:
‘Presents from My Aunts’ ... was one of the first poems I wrote. 
When I wrote this poem, I hadn’t actually been back to Pakistan. 
The girl in the poem would be me at about 13. The clothes seem to 
stick to her in an uncomfortable way, a bit like a kind of false skin 
and she thinks things aren’t straightforward for her.’
BACKGROUND
Moniza Alvi was born in Lahore, Pakistan. She has a Pakistani 
father and an English mother. Her father moved the family to 
England when she was very young, and she did not go back to 
Pakistan until after her first book of poems had been published. 
She worked for several years as a teacher in London and is now a 
freelance writer and tutor.
‘AN UNKNOWN GIRL’
MONIZA ALVI
▶
▲ Henna being used for body decoration
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
237
▼  ‘AN UNKNOWN GIRL’ BY MONIZA ALVI
In the evening bazaar
studded with neon
an unknown girl
is hennaing my hand.
She squeezes a wet brown line
from a nozzle.
She is icing my hand,
which she steadies with hers
on her satin-peach knee.
In the evening bazaar
for a few rupees
an unknown girl
is hennaing my hand.
As a little air catches
my shadow-stitched kameez
a peacock spreads its lines
across my palm.
Colours leave the street
float up in balloons.
Dummies in shop-fronts
tilt and stare
with their Western perms.
Banners for Miss India 1993,
▶
 bazaar A marketplace.
hennaing A method of applying a 
temporary tattoo using a strong reddish-
brown dye (henna).
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
‘I found it was important to write the Pakistan poems because I was 
getting in touch with my background. And maybe there’s a bit of a 
message behind the poems about something I went through, that I 
want to maybe open a few doors if possible.’
3 Talk to someone who has moved to another country. Ask them about 
how they feel about where they come from. Read about other people’s 
experiences of moving from one country to another.
4 If you or your family have moved from one country to another, think 
about your feelings about the original country. If you haven’t, talk to 
someone you know who has moved from one country to another and 
ask them about how they feel about the place that their family came 
from, or read about other people’s experiences.
kameez A loose-fitting tunic.
Miss India The national winner in a Miss 
World beauty contest.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
238
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
for curtain cloth
and sofa cloth
canopy me.
I have new brown veins.
In the evening bazaar
very deftly
an unknown girl
is hennaing my hand.
I am clinging
to these firm peacock lines
like people who cling
to the sides of a train.
Now the furious streets
are hushed.
I’ll scrape off
the dry brown lines
before I sleep,
reveal soft as a snail trail
the amber bird beneath.
It will fade in a week.
When India appears and reappears
I’ll lean across a country
with my hands outstretched
longing for the unknown girl
in the neon bazaar.
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
This poem describes the poet’s visit to India and the time she had her hand 
hennaed by a girl in the bazaar. It was an experience she never forgot.
The poem makes many connections between western and eastern culture. The 
‘unknown girl’ seems to stand for the true spirit of India, which has now been 
influenced heavily by aspects of western culture (often called ‘westernisation’). 
India is seen as colourful and beautiful and this is reflected in the decoration of 
the henna pattern, with its complicated peacock design.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
239
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
The poem has a number of themes:
 
◼
cultural identity
 
◼
a sense of belonging
 
◼
feelings of loss
 
◼
the known and the unknown
 
◼
the importance of people’s appearance
 
◼
the contrast between east and west.
Copy and complete the following table, finding examples from the poem that 
relate to its themes and adding your thoughts about how the selected example 
illustrates the theme. 
▼  THEME
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  COMMENT
Cultural identity 
 
 
‘I’ll lean across a country’ 
 
 
She feels the pull of India 
and her Asian heritage 
even when back in 
England.
A sense of belonging
 
 
Feelings of loss
 
 
The known and the 
unknown
 
 
The importance of people’s 
appearance
 
 
The contrast between east 
and west
The language that Alvi uses is mostly quite straightforward, but the poem 
includes some words that may be less familiar. Copy and complete the 
following table, giving the meaning of the words or phrases that are listed. 
▼  TEXT
▼  MEANING
‘bazaar’
A market place.
‘icing my hand’
 
‘their Western perms’
 
‘canopy me’
 
‘I have new brown veins’
 
‘amber bird’
KEY POINT
The poem draws on the tension in India 
between western and eastern culture.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
240
Alvi chooses her words to convey the atmosphere and colourful scenes in 
India and also to illustrate some westernised elements of Indian society. Copy 
and complete the table, writing a comment on each example and explain what 
the language suggests to you. 
▼  EXAMPLE 
▼  EXPLANATION
‘studded with neon’ 
 
This is a traditional market scene, but 
the market is lit up by a large number of 
electric lights.
‘on her satin-peach knee’
 
‘my shadow-stitched kameez’
 
‘a peacock spreads its lines’
 
‘Dummies … tilt and stare / with their 
Western perms’
 
‘Banners for Miss India 1993’
 
‘like people who cling / to the sides of a 
train’
 
‘the furious streets / are hushed’
How successfully does the writer of ‘An Unknown Girl’ present her feelings 
about the country she has visited?
In your answer, you should write about:
 
◼
the images of the country
 
◼
the way she feels about having her hand painted
 
◼
the writer’s use of words, phrases and techniques.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
SKILLS
INTELLECTUAL INTEREST, 
SELF-PRESENTATION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS,  
INTERPRETATION, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
▲ Modern India is much influenced by western 
culture
Imagine you are a television reporter who is sent to another country to 
report for a travel programme. Research your chosen destination and 
prepare a short talk about your impressions.
▼  REPORTING ON ANOTHER CULTURE
ACTIVITY 1
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
AO1
AO2
Write an article entitled either, ‘Why I like make-up’, or, ‘Make-up: a 
waste of time and money’.
▼  WRITING TASK
ACTIVITY 2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
241
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Tony Harrison was born in Leeds, Yorkshire, in 1937 and is a 
leading poet and translator. He has often written about social 
issues and sometimes about international issues. He wrote ‘The 
Bright Lights of Sarajevo’ when a national British newspaper sent 
him to write about Bosnia, a country in the Balkans, in September 
1995.
The Bosnian War took place between 1992 and 1995. It was a 
bitter conflict between parts of the former Yugoslavia, which 
broke out along old national and cultural boundaries at the 
beginning of the 1990s. The main division was between Bosnia 
and Serbia, but the political situation was very complex. The war 
was motivated by ethnic prejudice and Muslims in the region 
suffered horrific ethnic cleansing.
The poem is set in Sarajevo, capital city of Bosnia, during the 
siege mounted by Serb forces which lasted the entire duration of 
the war. Thousands of people died in the city during the siege.
THE BRIGHT LIGHTS OF SARAJEVO  
TONY HARRISON
GENERAL VOCABULARY
the Balkans a group of countries in south-
eastern Europe
Yugoslavia a country which separated 
into several smaller countries in the early 
1990s
ethnic cleansing the action of forcing 
people to leave an area or country or killing 
them because of their ethnic or religious 
identity
siege a situation in which an army or the 
police surround a place and try to gain 
control of it or force someone to come out 
of it
▶
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 The siege of Sarajevo is the longest siege of a capital city in modern 
history. Using the internet, do some research into the series of conflicts 
that broke apart Yugoslavia. 
2 One event that captured the attention of the international media and 
people worldwide was the gunning down of a young couple commonly 
referred to as ‘the Romeo and Juliet of Sarajevo’. Find out about them.
3 Think about how you would feel if your daily routines became restricted 
and it became too dangerous to even go out to buy a loaf of bread. How 
would you cope?
▲ The Bosnian War in the 1990s was an ethnic conflict between parts of the former Yugoslavia
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
242
▼  THE BRIGHT LIGHTS OF SARAJEVO BY TONY HARRISON
After the hours that Sarajevans pass
queuing with empty canisters of gas
to get the refills they wheel home in prams,
or queuing for the precious meagre grams
of bread they’re rationed to each day,
and often dodging snipers on the way,
or struggling up sometimes eleven flights
of stairs with water, then you’d think the nights
of Sarajevo would be totally devoid
of people walking streets Serb shells destroyed,
but tonight in Sarajevo that’s just not the case–
The young go walking at a stroller’s pace,
black shapes impossible to mark
as Muslim, Serb or Croat in such dark,
in unlit streets you can’t distinguish who
calls bread hjleb or hleb or calls it kruh, 
All takes the evening air with a stroller’s stride,
no torches guide them, but they don’t collide
except as one of the flirtatious ploys
when a girl’s dark shape is fancied by a boy’s.
Then the tender radar of the tone of voice
shows by its signals she approves his choice.
Then match or lighter to a cigarette
to check in her eyes if he’s made progress yet.
And I see a pair who’ve certainly progressed
beyond the tone of voice and match-lit flare test
and he’s about, I think, to take her hand
and lead her away from where they stand
prams A pushchair usually used for 
transporting children, used for a different 
purpose here.
meagre A very small amount.
grams A small unit of measuring weight. 
Together, ‘meagre’ and ‘grams’ emphasise 
the scarcity of food during the siege.
shells Explosive missiles or bombs.
bread Serbo-Croatian has several dialects 
used in Bosnia and Herzegovina. ‘Heljeb’ 
(intentionally mis-spelled by Harrison) is 
the Ljekavian term for bread, while ‘hleb’ 
is Ekavian. ‘Kruh’ is the term for bread in 
Croatian.
ploys Plans or actions used to gain an 
advantage of some type. 
5
10
15
20
25
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
243
on two shells scars, where, in 1992
Serb mortars massacred the breadshop queue
and blood-dunked crusts of shredded bread
lay on this pavement with the broken dead.
And at their feet in holes made by the mortar
that caused the massacre, now full of water
from the rain that’s poured down half the day,
though now even the smallest clouds have cleared away,
leaving the Sarajevo star-filled evening sky
ideally bright and clear for the bombers eye,
in those two rain-full shell-holes the boy sees
fragments of the splintered Pleiades, 
sprinkled on those death-deep, death-dark wells
splashed on the pavement by Serb mortar shells.
The dark boy-shape leads dark girl-shape away
to share one coffee in a candlelit café
until the curfew, and he holds her hand
behind AID flour-sacks refilled with sand. 
1992 On 27th May 1992, a breadline in 
Sarajevo was attacked with mortar fire, 
killing many people.
Pleiades An open star cluster of the 
constellation Taurus, also known as Seven 
Sisters. In Greek mythology, they were the 
daughters of Atlas who became stars.
AID flour-sacks Humanitarian aid is 
provided to conflict sites by international 
organisations. There is irony here in the fact 
that the sack is used to create barricades 
that protect civilians from mortar and sniper 
fire.
30
35
40
45
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
The poem is about the devastation and disruption caused by war and the 
resilience of the human spirit in the face of this. The poem highlights the 
difficulties faced by the citizens of Sarajevo and contrasts this with young 
couples whose relationships are slowly progressing in a city that seems to 
symbolise death. Harrison also uses references to the couples’ surroundings 
to show that, while life will continue in harsh environments, the reality of the 
situation is inescapable. He also explores the roots of the conflict, by showing 
that ethnic divides disappears into nothing in the shadows of the night.
THEMES
 
▶ What are the main themes of the poem? 
The following table shows some of the themes. Complete the table by finding 
examples from the text and adding your ideas, explaining how the example 
illustrates the theme. One quotation illustrating the theme of ‘war’ has been 
added for you as an example.
KEY POINT
The poet is writing about a complex 
conflict and it is a great challenge to 
capture its multiple facets in poetry, 
but also a situation with great literary 
potential.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
244
▼  THEME
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  COMMENT
War 
 
 
 
 
‘and often dodging snipers 
on the way’ 
 
 
 
Shows that, even while 
doing an ordinary task, 
there is a real risk of being 
killed. This highlights the 
reality of living in a war 
zone.
Deprivation
 
 
Love
 
 
 
 
 
The poem shows us paradoxes of the time – how ethnic conflict disappears 
at night; how romance can burst into life in terrible conditions; how gentle 
feelings can exist in the very place where people had been killed by shells 
earlier in the war. 
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
paradox a situation (or piece of writing) 
which contains strongly contrasting 
elements or meanings
SETTING AND EVENTS
 
▶ Think about the setting and the events of the poem. What can you say about 
the setting and the events? Do they seem unusual to you?
To help you understand what is happening, choose some of the poet’s 
observations and explain what they can tell us about Sarajevo and its people 
when the poem was written. One example has been done for you using the 
following table.
▼ HARRISON’S OBSERVATION
▼  WHAT THIS TELLS US ABOUT  
THE CITY AND PEOPLE
‘to get the refills they wheel home in 
prams’ 
 
Shows how the Sarajevans improvise to 
cope with the situation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The poem describes some unlikely events: at night, in bomb-damaged 
Sarajevo, young people from different ethnic groups move around the city and 
boys meet girls, despite the danger and darkness. However, violent events are 
also hinted at. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
245
STYLE
The language of the poem is mostly straightforward and even quite 
conversational. 
 
▶ Find two or three examples of this style of language. 
 
▶ What do you think is the effect of this style? Does it make the poem more 
realistic? Does it seem more accessible to you?
IMAGES
The images that the writer creates in this poem are not only visual. In fact, 
although visual imagery predominates this text, there are many other types of 
images used as well. Copy and complete the following table with examples of 
different types of imagery and their effect.
▼  TYPE OF IMAGE
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  EFFECT
Visual (sight)
 
 
Auditory (sound) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘tender radar of the tone 
of voice’ 
 
 
 
 
 
The image of radar is 
taken from the language 
of warfare. This makes it 
appropriate for the situation 
and also creates irony. The 
emotion expressed is in 
direct contrast to the horror 
of war.
Tactile (touch)
 
 
 
 
 
LIGHT AND DARKNESS
Reference to light and darkness are important in this poem. For this, a variety 
of nouns as well as adjectives are used. Copy and complete the following table 
with some examples and explain their effect. One has been done for you.
▼  NOUN
▼  EFFECT
▼  ADJECTIVE
▼  EFFECT
‘match’ 
 
 
 
A source of light, 
being small it 
resembles the 
fading signs of life 
in Sarajevo.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RHYME
A technique often seen in poetry is the use of rhyme. Different rhyme schemes 
can have different effects.
 
▶ What is the rhyme scheme of the poem? What effect does this have on you, 
the reader? Why do you think the writer chose such a simple rhyme scheme?
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
conversational informal style, as though 
spoken in conversation with someone else
GENERAL VOCABULARY
predominate to have the most importance 
or influence, or to be most easily noticed
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
rhyme scheme The rhyming pattern used 
in a poem
KEY POINT
Visual imagery is common in literature, 
however a writer can deploy other 
kinds of imagery, all of which evoke 
the human senses to draw in the 
reader.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
246
CONTRAST
Throughout the poem, Harrison conveys the contrast between the activities 
of ordinary Sarajevans and the strange and difficult conditions in which they 
live. He does this by presenting everyday activities alongside evidence of the 
violence of war.
Some of the techniques used in the language to express this contrast are: 
 
◼
associations – hinting at a setting, a situation or feelings by using related 
words and phrases
 
◼
contrasting word chains, such as lists of peaceful activities followed by 
contrasting vocabulary suggesting violence and war.
Copy and complete the following table with examples of contrasting language 
and its effect.
▼  LINES
▼  CONTRASTING WORDS OR 
PHRASES
▼  EFFECT OF THE CONTRAST
4-6 
 
 
‘queuing for the ...grams of bread / 
often dodging snipers on the way’ 
 
We are all used to queueing as an 
everyday activity, but the idea of 
being shot at becoming part of the 
routine is shocking.
10-12 
‘streets Serb shells destroyed / 
walking at a stroller’s pace’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
contrast a clear distinction between two or 
more things
SKILLS
PROBLEM SOLVING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION, INTELLECTUAL 
INTEREST
 
◼
How does the writer successfully convey the horror of war and the ability 
of human beings to rise above it? In your answer, you should write about:
 
>
the ideas about war conveyed in the poem
 
>
the way the writer uses images and contrast
 
>
the writer’s use of words, phrases and techniques.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, 
including brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, 
ANALYSIS, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
AO1
AO2
1 Research the story of Vedran Smailovic, a cellist in the Sarajevo 
Philharmonic Orchestra.
2 Write a story that focuses on an act that shows courage or celebrates 
life.
3 Imagine that you are one of the boys or girls mentioned in the poem.
4 Do some more research on daily life during the Bosnian War, then 
write a piece called ‘Romance under Siege’ about trying to establish 
a relationship during wartime conditions.
▼  WRITING TASKS
ACTIVITY 1
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
247
HINT: 
Remember that the word ‘how’ means 
that you are expected to discuss methods 
or techniques used by the writer to create 
certain effects. To improve your answers, 
you need to be able to comment in some 
detail about particular words and phrases, 
explaining the impact on the reader or 
how you think the poet intends the reader 
to react. It is better to write about a few 
techniques and quotations in detail than to 
try to fit in a lot of points without explaining 
them properly.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS,  
INTERPRETATION, DECISION 
MAKING
‘Corpse’ is a poem taken from Sarajevo Blues, a collection written 
by Semezdin Mehmedinovic, who lived in Sarajevo during the siege. 
Written by a citizen rather than an observer, this poem has similarities 
to as well as differences from ‘The Bright Lights of Sarajevo’ in terms of 
ideas and language. Think about these similarities and differences and 
write them down in the table that follows. You can look at techniques 
such as rhyme scheme, as well as the themes and ideas.
▼  FINDING SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES
ACTIVITY 2
 
◼
How does the writer present the difficult and dangerous conditions in 
Sarajevo in ‘The Bright Lights of Sarajevo’? In your answer, you should 
write about:
 
>
the description of the physical environment
 
>
the way people are behaving 
 
>
the writer’s use of language and techniques.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, 
including brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
▼  ‘CORPSE’ BY SEMEZDIN MEHMEDINOVIC
We slowed down at the bridge
to watch some dogs tear a
corpse apart by the river
and then we went on
nothing in me has changed                                                                        5
I heard the crunch of snow under tires
like teeth biting into an apple
and felt the wild desire to laugh
at you
because you call this place hell                                                                 10
and you flee from here convinced
that death outside Sarajevo does not exist
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
248
▼  SIMILARITIES
▼  DIFFERENCES
Both poems give details from daily life, 
such as ‘crunch of snow under the tires’, 
‘empty canisters of gas’.
The titles. ‘Bright lights…’ has apparently 
positive connotations but ‘Corpse’ creates 
an immediately negative impression.
 
 
WRITING A SUCCESSFUL ANSWER
 
▶ How does the writer use contrast to convey his message in the poem?
Below are two samples of opening paragraphs that respond to this question. 
Which do you think is better? Annotate the samples with your observations, 
referring to the wording of AO2 as you do so. What improvements would you 
make to both answers?
STUDENT A
‘The Bright Lights of Sarajevo’ is a poem by Tony 
Harrison that is set in the background of the Bosnian 
war. This war went on for many years and resulted in 
lots of causalities. The writer wants to show that he 
is against war and uses contrast for this purpose. The 
biggest contrast he uses is colour. He describes the city 
in detail as well.
Set against the Bosnian war, this poem delivers a 
strong message about the devastation caused by war 
and the way people are able to rise above it. For this 
purpose he mainly uses contrast as a technique. Firstly, 
he creates the world of Sarajevo by day and by night. 
This helps the reader to visualise the contrasting times 
of day.
STUDENT B
▲ Bosnian cellist Vedran Smailovic
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
249
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Read about slavery in the United States of America. 
2 All of us want to be treated fairly and we all become angry if we think 
we have been treated unfairly. But are we, ourselves, always fair? Talk 
about situations where you might have behaved unfairly.
3 Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792–1822) was a major Romantic poet who 
wrote that ‘poets are the unacknowledged legislators of the world’. 
Throughout history, poetry has been used as a medium of protest and 
a call to social change. Do some research to find examples of poetry 
of protest. You could also look at the work of modern-day rap and hip 
hop artists, and at the way in which pop music has become a medium 
through which social and political issues are addressed.
BACKGROUND
Maya Angelou was an American poet, writer, singer, composer, 
actor, director, lecturer and civil rights activist. Her illustrious career, 
which spanned six decades, won her both fame and critical acclaim 
as well as numerous awards and honorary degrees. Her work 
centres on such themes as racism, family, women and identity, and 
she is an important figure in the black literary tradition.
She has written seven autobiographies, which include I Know Why 
the Caged Bird Sings and A Song Flung up to Heaven. Her candid 
discussion of her life and background as well as the range of her 
artistic talent and expression has made her an inspiration to many.
‘STILL I RISE’
MAYA ANGELOU
▼  ‘STILL I RISE’ BY MAYA ANGELOU
You may write me down in history 
With your bitter, twisted lies, 
You may trod me in the very dirt 
But still, like dust, I’ll rise.
Does my sassiness upset you? 
Why are you beset with gloom? 
‘Cause I walk like I’ve got oil wells 
Pumping in my living room.
Just like moons and like suns, 
With the certainty of tides, 
Just like hopes springing high, 
Still I’ll rise.
Did you want to see me broken? 
Bowed head and lowered eyes? 
Shoulders falling down like teardrops, 
Weakened by my soulful cries?
▶
▶
sassiness Lively spiritedness, sometimes 
considered cheeky.
oil wells In the 19th and early 20th century 
the discovery of oil and the rapid growth of 
the petroleum industry made oil an integral 
part of the US economy and a symbol of 
wealth.
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
15 
 
▲ Awarding-winning American writer Maya 
Angelou
▲ The oil industry grew rapidly in the US in the 
19th and early 20th century
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
250
Does my haughtiness offend you? 
Don’t you take it awful hard 
‘Cause I laugh like I’ve got gold mines 
Diggin’ in my own backyard.
You may shoot me with your words, 
You may cut me with your eyes, 
You may kill me with your hatefulness, 
But still, like air, I’ll rise.
Does my sexiness upset you? 
Does it come as a surprise 
That I dance like I’ve got diamonds 
At the meeting of my thighs?
Out of the huts of history’s shame 
I rise 
Up from a past that’s rooted in pain 
I rise 
I’m a black ocean, leaping and wide, 
Welling and swelling I bear in the tide.
Leaving behind nights of terror and fear 
I rise 
Into a daybreak that’s wondrously clear 
I rise 
Bringing the gifts that my ancestors gave, 
I am the dream and the hope of the slave. 
I rise 
I rise 
I rise.
‘Still I Rise’ is a powerful challenge aimed at the people who have oppressed 
the speaker and her community. Instead of expressing simple anger at 
the unfairness of one group oppressing another, she challenges the very 
foundations of oppression by asserting her pride in who she is. She is proud 
of herself and her people and implies that this pride is rooted in the strength 
and resilience of her people. The similes she uses, of oil wells and diamonds, 
assert that the wealth of her innate qualities more than equals the pride 
brought by material wealth. 
The speaker’s spirit is compared with a force of nature through the use of 
vocabulary relating to the natural world. The range of vocabulary varies from 
dust, usually seen as worthless but that is overpowering when it rises like 
a storm, to moons and suns, sources of light and life with many positive 
connotations. 
The poem has several themes:
 
◼
racism
 
◼
oppression
 
◼
pride in oneself and one’s background
 
◼
feminism
 
◼
beauty
 
◼
independence.
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
haughtiness Being arrogantly superior.
gold mines The discovery of gold in 
California in 1848 and the period of panning 
and mining for gold that followed is a 
significant period in American history.
huts A reference to slave accommodation 
on plantations.
20
25
30
35
40
KEY POINT
The poet uses similes to signify 
resistance to oppression and the 
indomitable power of the human spirit.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
251
Copy and complete the following table, finding examples from the poem that 
relate to these themes and adding your thoughts about how the language 
illustrates each theme. 
▼  THEME
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  COMMENT
Racism 
 
 
Oppression 
 
 
Pride in oneself and one’s 
background 
 
 
 
‘Bringing the gifts that my 
ancestors gave’ 
 
 
 
The speaker sees her 
background as a source 
of pride rather than as a 
disadvantage. The word 
‘gifts’ shows everything she 
inherited in a positive light.
Feminism 
 
 
Beauty 
 
 
Independence
Look carefully at the quotations in the following table and identify the 
technique that it demonstrates. Then copy and complete the table, explaining 
the effect of each example and adding other examples of your own. 
▼  TECHNIQUE
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  EFFECT
 
‘like dust’ 
 
Colloquial speech 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Don’t you take it awful hard’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The poet uses colloquial 
American language to 
highlight her sense of 
amusement at the lack of 
confidence her oppressors 
feel when they are directly 
challenged.  
 
‘history’s shame’ 
 
 
‘I rise / I rise / I rise’ 
 
 
 
 
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
KEY POINT
Practising your ability to recognise 
literary techniques will enhance your 
ability to assess how the writer is 
working and therefore sharpen your 
critical skills.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
252
Direct address is a technique that dominates this poem. The poem is both personal 
and political in nature and it intends that the audience will listen and respond to 
the speaker’s rhetoric. Both the speaker and the audience who is addressed are 
clearly defined by the language used. Copy and complete the following table with 
examples that define the characteristics of speaker and audience. 
▼ SPEAKER
▼ AUDIENCE
EXAMPLE
CHARACTERISTIC 
EXPLAINED
EXAMPLE
CHARACTERISTIC 
EXPLAINED
‘Does my sexiness upset you?’ 
 
 
 
 
The speaker is someone 
who has confidence in her 
femininity. 
 
 
‘You may write me down in 
history /  
With your bitter, twisted lies’ 
 
 
The audience is down to be 
manipulative and dishonest, 
legitimising racial oppression 
through the way in which 
history was written. 
  
 
 
 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
Angelou also uses structure to effectively convey the idea that both the 
speaker and her people will continue to rise in spite of discrimination and 
oppression.
First, write down the rhyme scheme of the poem. Do you think that 
Angelou’s choice of rhyme scheme is important? Does the rhyme 
scheme change at any point? What is the effect of this change?
▼  RHYME SCHEME
▼  COMMENT
Now look at each verse and comment on its purpose and how it 
contributes to the overall structure. 
▼  USING STRUCTURE
ACTIVITY 1
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
253
Many people believe that the right to be free is one of the most 
important rights we have as human beings, and some feel that it is 
everyone’s duty to ensure that every person in the world is free. Do you 
agree? Discuss your reasons why or why not.
▼  FREEDOM AS A RIGHT OR A DUTY
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
INTERPERSONAL SKILLS,  
NEGOTIATION
▼  VERSE
▼  PURPOSE AND STRUCTURE
1 
 
 
 
 
Offers a direct challenge to the 
audience and establishes the theme. 
The construction, ‘You may…’, lists 
the different types of injustice that 
the speaker has had to face, while the 
emphatic statement, ‘I’ll rise’ , suggests 
that she will overcome these injustices. 
It is a structural feature that will be 
repeated in the poem.
2 
 
Questions the audience. It establishes the 
overall structural feature of questioning 
followed by an assertion of strength and 
superiority. 
3
 
4
 
5
 
6
 
7
 
8
‘I rise’ is given in separate lines so as to 
…
9
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
254
GENERAL VOCABULARY
abolitionist someone who wants to end a 
system or law
spirituals religious songs associated with 
African-American Christians living in the 
southern United States of America
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
Times of oppression often cause people to react in creative and innovative 
ways. Harriet Tubman was an African-American abolitionist who, after 
escaping from slavery herself, helped to rescue groups of enslaved 
men and women. The route used for these escapes was known as the 
Underground Railroad, and the safe houses and helpers on the way were 
referred to as ‘stations’ and ‘conductors’. The journeys that Tubman and 
other ‘conductors’ undertook were difficult and dangerous and it was 
necessary for Tubman to communicate using code. It is thought that 
spirituals were used to give instructions to those waiting to escape.
Match the purposes (a–d) with the song lyrics.
a Communicates that the singer is planning to escape.
b When a slave hears this song he knows that he must be ready to 
escape.
c This is a set of directions.
d This song indicates that it is safe for the escaping slaves to meet the 
conductor.
▼  REACTIONS TO OPPRESSION
ACTIVITY 4
•
Steal away, steal away!
Steal away to Jesus! 
Steal away, steal away home! 
I ain’t got long to stay here!
•
Hail, oh hail, ye happy spirits, 
Death no more shall make you fear, 
Grief nor sorrow, pain nor anguish, 
Shall no more distress you there.
•
Wade in the water, wade in the water children.
Wade in the water. God’s gonna trouble the water. 
Who are those children all dressed in red? 
God’s gonna trouble the water. 
Must be the ones that Moses led. 
God’s gonna trouble the water.
Who are those children all dressed in white? 
God’s gonna trouble the water. 
Must be the ones of the Israelites. 
God’s gonna trouble the water.
•
Swing low, sweet chariot, 
Coming for to carry me home, 
Swing low, sweet chariot, 
Coming for to carry me home.
I looked over Jordan and what did I see 
Coming for to carry me home, 
A band of angels coming after me, 
Coming for to carry me home.
Write an essay on the topic, ‘By the Colour of My Skin’, exploring your 
ideas of self and how important or unimportant appearance is to you 
and others.
▼  WRITING TASK
ACTIVITY 3
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
255
How does the poet pose a challenge to and triumph over her oppressors? 
In your answer, you should write about:
 
◼
the ideas about racism and oppression conveyed in the poem
 
◼
the way the poet uses comparison and images
 
◼
the poet’s use of words, phrases and techniques.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
AO1
AO2
Now write a simple rhyming verse or two of your own that has a hidden 
meaning. It could be a message or even directions. Copy and complete the 
following table, writing the verse in the first column and the hidden meaning in 
the second one. You may wish to work in pairs for this task.
▼  VERSE
▼  MEANING
KEY POINT
Writing with hidden meaning requires 
you to use all your resources of literary 
imagery and symbolism.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
256
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Feminism means supporting women’s rights and the equality of the 
sexes. You can find out more about the history of feminism from 
reference books or on the internet. You might like to research the 
following questions.
 
◼
What law in the UK gave women the right to have their own earnings 
and property for the first time?
 
◼
When were women first allowed to graduate from Oxford University? 
 
◼
When were women first allowed to vote in UK parliamentary 
elections? 
2 Kate Chopin’s short stories are widely available online and in print. You 
could read more of her short stories, such as ‘Reflections’, ‘Desiree’s 
Baby’ or ‘The Storm’, which will help you to understand her attitudes 
towards being a woman in the 19th century. You might like to explore 
some short stories written by other female authors of the time: Charlotte 
Perkins Gilman’s ‘Turned’ (1911) presents similarly unconventional 
female characters for the period. 
3 Five Stories of an Hour presents five dramatisations of the story each 
keep the brevity of the story, but reads between the lines in a different 
way. Watch this online and to compare these interpretations with one 
other and with your own reading of the story and the characters.
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Katherine O’Flaherty, known by her married name Chopin, was an 
American author of short stories and novels. She is best known for 
her collection of short stories, The Awakening, published in 1899.
The roles of men and women were very traditionally defined in 
the 19th century, and this was common in 19th century writing. 
However, Chopin’s stories were daring rather than traditional 
and often portrayed women as trapped and unhappy in their 
marriages. As a result, she was criticised and her books were 
even banned from libraries. She is now known as an important 
early feminist writer and admired for her honest depictions of 
women’s lives.
Story of an Hour was first published in Vogue in 1894 and is 
one of her most popular stories. It tells the story of a woman’s 
reaction to being told that her husband has died in an accident. 
STORY OF AN HOUR
KATE CHOPIN
▶
▶
Knowing that Mrs. Mallard was afflicted with a heart trouble, great care was 
taken to break to her as gently as possible the news of her husband’s death. 
It was her sister Josephine who told her, in broken sentences; veiled hints that 
revealed in half concealing. Her husband’s friend Richards was there, too, 
▼  THE STORY OF AN HOUR BY KATE CHOPIN
KEY POINT
Kate Chopin’s short stories are notable 
for their honest portrayal of women’s 
lives in the period.
▲ Kate Chopin, writing in the late 19th century, 
was a pioneer of feminist literature
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
257
near her. It was he who had been in the newspaper office when intelligence 
of the railroad disaster was received, with Brently Mallard’s name leading 
the list of ‘killed.’ He had only taken the time to assure himself of its truth by 
a second telegram, and had hastened to forestall any less careful, less tender 
friend in bearing the sad message. 
She did not hear the story as many women have heard the same, with a 
paralyzed inability to accept its significance. She wept at once, with sudden, 
wild abandonment, in her sister’s arms. When the storm of grief had spent 
itself she went away to her room alone. She would have no one follow her. 
There stood, facing the open window, a comfortable, roomy armchair. Into 
this she sank, pressed down by a physical exhaustion that haunted her body 
and seemed to reach into her soul. 
She could see in the open square before her house the tops of trees that were 
all aquiver with the new spring life. The delicious breath of rain was in the 
air. In the street below a peddler was crying his wares. The notes of a distant 
song which some one was singing reached her faintly, and countless sparrows 
were twittering in the eaves. 
There were patches of blue sky showing here and there through the clouds 
that had met and piled one above the other in the west facing her window. 
She sat with her head thrown back upon the cushion of the chair, quite 
motionless, except when a sob came up into her throat and shook her, as a 
child who has cried itself to sleep continues to sob in its dreams. 
She was young, with a fair, calm face, whose lines bespoke repression and even 
a certain strength. But now there was a dull stare in her eyes, whose gaze was 
fixed away off yonder on one of those patches of blue sky. It was not a glance 
of reflection, but rather indicated a suspension of intelligent thought. 
There was something coming to her and she was waiting for it, fearfully. 
What was it? She did not know; it was too subtle and elusive to name. But 
she felt it, creeping out of the sky, reaching toward her through the sounds, 
the scents, the color that filled the air. 
Now her bosom rose and fell tumultuously. She was beginning to recognize 
this thing that was approaching to possess her, and she was striving to beat 
it back with her will—as powerless as her two white slender hands would 
have been. When she abandoned herself a little whispered word escaped her 
slightly parted lips. She said it over and over under her breath: ‘free, free, 
free!’ The vacant stare and the look of terror that had followed it went from 
her eyes. They stayed keen and bright. Her pulses beat fast, and the coursing 
blood warmed and relaxed every inch of her body. 
She did not stop to ask if it were or were not a monstrous joy that held her. A 
clear and exalted perception enabled her to dismiss the suggestion as trivial. 
She knew that she would weep again when she saw the kind, tender hands 
folded in death; the face that had never looked save with love upon her, fixed 
and gray and dead. But she saw beyond that bitter moment a long procession 
of years to come that would belong to her absolutely. And she opened and 
spread her arms out to them in welcome. 
There would be no one to live for during those coming years; she would live for 
herself. There would be no powerful will bending hers in that blind persistence 
with which men and women believe they have a right to impose a private will 
upon a fellow-creature. A kind intention or a cruel intention made the act seem 
no less a crime as she looked upon it in that brief moment of illumination. 
▶
▲ “... the tops of trees that were all aquiver with 
the new spring life.”
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
258
And yet she had loved him—sometimes. Often she had not. What did it 
matter! What could love, the unsolved mystery, count for in the face of this 
possession of self-assertion which she suddenly recognized as the strongest 
impulse of her being! 
‘Free! Body and soul free!’ she kept whispering. 
Josephine was kneeling before the closed door with her lips to the keyhold, 
imploring for admission. ‘Louise, open the door! I beg; open the door—you will 
make yourself ill. What are you doing, Louise? For heaven’s sake open the door.’ 
‘Go away. I am not making myself ill.’ No; she was drinking in a very elixir 
of life through that open window. 
Her fancy was running riot along those days ahead of her. Spring days, and 
summer days, and all sorts of days that would be her own. She breathed a 
quick prayer that life might be long. It was only yesterday she had thought 
with a shudder that life might be long. 
She arose at length and opened the door to her sister’s importunities. There 
was a feverish triumph in her eyes, and she carried herself unwittingly like a 
goddess of Victory. She clasped her sister’s waist, and together they descended 
the stairs. Richards stood waiting for them at the bottom. 
Some one was opening the front door with a latchkey. It was Brently Mallard 
who entered, a little travel-stained, composedly carrying his grip-sack and 
umbrella. He had been far from the scene of the accident, and did not even 
know there had been one. He stood amazed at Josephine’s piercing cry; at 
Richards’ quick motion to screen him from the view of his wife. 
But Richards was too late. 
When the doctors came they said she had died of heart disease—of the joy 
that kills. 
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
Story of an Hour is about a wife, Mrs Mallard, who has a heart condition 
which means that she should not become over-excited. She is told, and 
briefly believes, that her husband has been killed in a train accident. The story 
documents the mix of the intense emotions, confusion and sense of freedom 
that she feels upon hearing this news. 
The story describes the epiphany that Mrs Mallard experiences as she 
considers her husband’s ‘death’. She comes to the realisation that, although 
she sometimes loved her husband, that she is free and happier without him. 
She looks forward to her future, rather than worrying about it as she had 
before. 
We learn that her name is Louise: she has her own identity and is known 
by her own, rather than married, name because she is free. She opens the 
door to her sister Josephine with a sparkle in her eye and a new sense of 
self. They descend the staircase together. Someone opens the door. It is her 
husband, Brently Mallard, unharmed and unaware of the transformation that 
has occurred with his absence. We hear a scream from Josephine and see the 
attempt to conceal the living dead from the view of the heart patient. But it is 
too late and Mrs. Mallard’s heart has stopped,
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
Mrs Mallard’s appearance, status and feelings are described in detail over the 
course of the story. Copy and complete the following table, considering her 
thoughts and finding evidence to support you.
GENERAL VOCABULARY
epiphany a moment of sudden and great 
understanding or realisation
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
259
▼  DESCRIPTION 
▼  WHAT IT TELLS US ABOUT MRS 
MALLARD
‘Knowing that Mrs. Mallard had a heart 
condition, great care was taken to break to 
her as gently as possible about her husband’s 
death.’
 
 
 
‘she was young, with a fair, calm face, whose 
lines bespoke repression’
 
 
She feels trapped by her marriage.
 
She feels freed by her husband’s death.
▼  NARRATIVE 
DEVICE
▼  DEFINITION
▼  EXAMPLE 
▼  EXPLANATION
Pathetic fallacy 
 
 
 
 
Giving human 
emotions to 
nature 
 
 
‘delicious 
breath of rain’ 
 
 
 
The language here shows the 
happiness she feels at being 
free. The description of the sky 
shows patches of blue between 
white clouds; birds are singing 
and the air is fresh and fertile.
Oxymoron 
 
 
 
 
A contradiction 
in terms 
 
 
 
‘a monstrous 
joy’ 
 
 
 
This demonstrates the conflict 
of emotions and emphasises 
the extent to which the actual 
emotion (joy) differs from the 
expected and ‘appropriate’ 
emotion, sorrow. 
Symbolism 
 
 
 
 
The use of 
symbols to 
represent ideas 
or qualities. 
 
‘she was 
drinking in the 
very elixir of 
life through 
that open 
window’
The open window represents 
the liberation and freedom Mrs 
Mallard feels from her stifling 
and repressive marriage.  
 
KEY POINT
Your knowledge of narrative technique 
will inform your assessment of the 
meaning making in texts.
How does the writer create feelings of freedom and liberation in ‘The Story of 
an Hour’?
In your answer, you should write about:
 
◼
the narrator’s reaction to the news
 
◼
the effect of setting
 
◼
the use of language
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
AO1
AO2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
When reading texts like this, it is important to consider the way in which 
the author has used narrative devices to create meaning. Look at the 
following table of narrative devices and definitions. Can you find more 
examples from the text for each one?
▼  NARRATIVE TECHNIQUES
ACTIVITY 2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
260
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Find out more about Guy de Maupassant. There are many websites 
giving information about him. His short stories are also available online, 
such as Vendetta and Boule de Suif.
2 Think of a time when you made a mistake that had serious 
consequences. Who or what was to blame? What lessons did you draw 
from the experience?
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
This story is translated from French. It was written by Guy de 
Maupassant, who lived from 1850 to 1893 and was famous for 
his short stories. It is set against the background of 19th century 
Paris in France, where society was divided into strict social 
classes. Monsieur and Madame Loisel (the main characters) are 
not poor, but neither are they rich. They depend on the little money 
Monsieur Loisel earns from his minor job with the government.
THE NECKLACE
GUY DE MAUPASSANT
She was one of those pretty, delightful girls who, apparently by some error 
of Fate, get themselves born the daughters of very minor civil servants. She 
had no dowry, no expectations, no means of meeting some rich, important 
man who would understand, love, and marry her. So she went along with a 
proposal made by a junior clerk in the Ministry of Education.
She dressed simply, being unable to afford anything better, but she was every 
whit as unhappy as any daughter of good family who has come down in 
the world. Women have neither rank nor class, and their beauty, grace, and 
charm do service for birthright and connections. Natural guile, instinctive 
elegance, and adaptability are what determines their place in the hierarchy, 
and a girl of no birth to speak of may easily be the equal of any society lady.
She was unhappy all the time, for she felt that she was intended for a life of 
refinement and luxury. She was made unhappy by the run-down apartment 
they lived in, the peeling walls, the battered chairs, and the ugly curtains. Now 
all this, which any other woman of her station might never even have noticed, 
was torture to her and made her very angry. The spectacle of the young Breton 
peasant girl who did the household chores stirred sad regrets and impossible 
fancies. She dreamed of silent antechambers hung with oriental tapestries, lit 
by tall, bronze candelabras, and of two tall footmen in liveried breeches asleep 
in the huge armchairs, dozing in the heavy heat of a stove. She dreamed of 
great drawing-rooms dressed with old silk, filled with fine furniture which 
showed off trinkets beyond price, and of pretty little parlours, filled with 
perfumes and just made for intimate talk at five in the afternoon with one’s 
closest friends who would be the most famous and sought-after men of the day 
whose attentions were much coveted and desired by all women.
▶
▶
Breton Someone from Britanny, an area of 
north-western France.
liveried Part of a uniform, usually a 
servant’s uniform.
trinket A small decorative object.
hierarchy A strict order of importance.
▼  THE NECKLACE BY GUY DE MAUPASSANT
▲ Maupassant’s favourite themes include the 
countryside and daily life, but also pessimism, 
despair, madness and death
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
261
When she sat down to dinner at the round table spread with a three-day-
old cloth, facing her husband who always lifted the lid of the soup-tureen 
and declared delightedly: ‘Ah! Stew! Splendid! There’s nothing I like better 
than a nice stew...’, she dreamed of elegant dinners, gleaming silverware, and 
tapestries which peopled the walls with mythical characters and strange birds 
in enchanted forests; she dreamed of exquisite dishes served on fabulous 
china plates, of pretty compliments whispered into willing ears and received 
with Sphinx-like smiles over the pink flesh of a trout or the wings of a hazel 
hen.
She had no fine dresses, no jewellery, nothing. And that was all she cared 
about; she felt that God had made her for such things. She would have given 
anything to be popular, envied, attractive, and in demand.
She had a friend who was rich, a friend from her convent days, on whom she 
never called now, for she was always so unhappy afterwards. Sometimes, for 
days on end, she would weep tears of sorrow, regret, despair, and anguish.
One evening her husband came home looking highly pleased with himself. In 
his hand he brandished a large envelope.
‘Look,’ he said, ‘I’ve got something for you.’
She tore the paper flap eagerly and extracted a printed card bearing these 
words:
The Minister of Education and Madame Georges Ramponneau request the 
pleasure of the company of Monsieur and Madame Loisel at the Ministry 
Buildings on the evening of 18 January.
Instead of being delighted as her husband had hoped, she tossed the 
invitation peevishly onto the table and muttered: ‘What earthly use is that to 
me?’
‘But, darling, I thought you’d be happy. You never go anywhere and it’s an 
opportunity, a splendid opportunity! I had the dickens of a job getting hold 
of an invite. Everybody’s after them; they’re very much in demand and not 
many are handed out to us clerks. You’ll be able to see all the big nobs there.’
She looked at him irritably and said shortly: ‘And what am I supposed to 
wear if I do go?’
He had not thought of that. He blustered: ‘What about the dress you wear 
for the theatre? It looks all right to me…’ The words died in his throat. He 
was totally disconcerted and dismayed by the sight of his wife who had 
begun to cry. Two large tears rolled slowly out of the corners of her eyes and 
down towards the sides of her mouth.
‘What’s up?’ he stammered. ‘What’s the matter?’
Making a supreme effort, she controlled her sorrows and, wiping her damp 
cheeks, replied quite calmly: ‘Nothing. It’s just that I haven’t got anything to 
wear and consequently I shan’t be going to any reception. Give the invite to 
one of your colleagues with a wife who is better off for clothes than I am.’
He was devastated. He went on: ‘Oh come on, Mathilde. Look, what could it 
cost to get something suitable that would do for other occasions, something 
fairly simple?’
She thought for a few moments, working out her sums but also wondering 
▶
Sphinx-like Mysterious and difficult to 
interpret.
Monsieur and Madame Loisel Mr and 
Mrs Loisel.
peevishly Irritably, crossly.
big nobs Wealthy people of high social 
status.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
262
how much she could decently ask for without drawing an immediate refusal 
and pained protests from her husband who was careful with his money. 
Finally, after some hesitation, she said: ‘I can’t say precisely, but I daresay I 
could get by on four hundred francs.’
He turned slightly pale, for he had been setting aside just that amount to buy 
a gun and finance hunting trips the following summer in the flat landscape 
around Nanterre with a few friends who went shooting larks there on 
Sundays. But he said: ‘Very well. I’ll give you your four hundred francs. But 
do try and get a decent dress.’
The day of the reception drew near and Madame Loisel appeared sad, 
worried, anxious. Yet all her clothes were ready. One evening her husband 
said: ‘What’s up? You haven’t half been acting funny these last few days.’
She replied: ‘It vexes me that I haven’t got a single piece of jewellery, not one 
stone, that I can put on. I’ll look like a church mouse. I’d almost as soon not 
go to the reception.’
‘Wear a posy,’ he said. ‘It’s all the rage this year. You could get two or three 
magnificent roses for ten francs.’
She was not convinced. ‘No. There’s nothing so humiliating as to look poor 
when you’re with women who are rich.’
But her husband exclaimed: ‘You aren’t half silly! Look, go and see your 
friend, Madame Forestier, and ask her to lend you some jewellery. You know 
her well enough for that.’
She gave a delighted cry: ‘You’re right! I never thought of that!’
The next day she called on her friend and told her all about her problem. 
Madame Forestier went over to a mirror-fronted wardrobe, took out a large 
casket, brought it over, unlocked it, and said to Madame Loisel: ‘Choose 
whatever you like.’
At first she saw bracelets, then a rope of pearls and a Venetian cross made 
of gold and diamonds admirably fashioned. She tried on the necklaces in the 
mirror, and could hardly bear to take them off and give them back. She kept 
asking: ‘Have you got anything else?’
‘Yes, of course. Just look. I can’t say what sort of thing you’ll like best.’
All of a sudden, in a black satinwood case, she found a magnificent diamond 
necklace, and her heart began to beat with immoderate desire. Her hands 
shook as she picked it up. She fastened it around her throat over her 
high-necked dress and sat looking at herself in rapture. Then, diffidently, 
apprehensively, she asked: ‘Can you lend me this? Nothing else. Just this.’
‘But of course.’
She threw her arms around her friend, kissed her extravagantly, and then ran 
home, taking her treasure with her.
The day of the reception arrived. Madame Loisel was a success. She was the 
prettiest woman there, elegant, graceful, radiant, and wonderfully happy. All 
the men looked at her, enquired who she was, and asked to be introduced. 
All the cabinet secretaries and under-secretaries wanted to waltz with her. She 
was even noticed by the Minister himself.
▶
Venetian From Venice, in Italy.
francs The former currency of France 
before the introduction of the euro.
posy A small bunch of flowers.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
263
She danced ecstatically, wildly, intoxicated with pleasure, giving no thought 
to anything else, swept along on her victorious beauty and glorious success, 
and floating on a cloud of happiness composed of the homage, admiration, 
and desire she evoked and the kind of complete and utter triumph which is 
so sweet to a woman’s heart.
She left at about four in the morning. Since midnight her husband had been 
dozing in a small, empty side-room with three other men whose wives were 
having an enjoyable time.
He helped her on with her coat which he had fetched when it was time to 
go, a modest, everyday coat, a commonplace coat violently at odds with 
the elegance of her dress. It brought her down to earth, and she would have 
preferred to slip away quietly and avoid being noticed by the other women 
who were being arrayed in rich furs. But Loisel grabbed her by the arm: ‘Wait 
a sec. You’ll catch cold outside. I’ll go and get a cab.’
But she refused to listen and ran quickly down the stairs. When they were 
outside in the street, there was no cab in sight. They began looking for one, 
hailing all the cabbies they saw driving by in the distance.
They walked down to the Seine in desperation, shivering with cold. There, 
on the embankment, they at last found one of those aged nocturnal hackney 
cabs which only emerge in Paris after dusk, as if ashamed to parade their 
poverty in the full light of day. It bore them back to their front door in the 
rue des Martyrs, and they walked sadly up to their apartment. For her it was 
all over, while he was thinking that he would have to be at the Ministry at 
ten.
Standing in front of the mirror, she took off the coat she had been wearing 
over her shoulders, to get a last look at herself in all her glory. Suddenly she 
gave a cry. The necklace was no longer round her throat!
Her husband, who was already half undressed, asked: ‘What’s up?’
She turned to him in a panic: ‘I… I… Madame Forestier’s necklace… I 
haven’t got it!’
He straightened up as if thunderstruck: ‘What?… But… You can’t have lost 
it!’
They looked in the pleats of her dress, in the folds of her coat, and in her 
pockets. They looked everywhere. They did not find it.
‘Are you sure you still had it when you left the ballroom?’ he asked.
‘Yes, I remember fingering it in the entrance hall.’
‘But if you’d lost it in the street, we’d have heard it fall. So it must be in the 
cab.’
‘That’s right. That’s probably it. Did you get his number?’
‘No. Did you happen to notice it?’
‘No.’
They looked at each other in dismay. Finally Loisel got dressed again. ‘I’m 
going to go back the way we came,’ he said, ‘to see if I can find it.’ He went 
out. She remained as she was, still wearing her evening gown, not having the 
strength to go to bed, sitting disconsolately on a chair by the empty grate,  
▶
Seine The river that runs through Paris.
hackney cab An early form of taxi.
homage Respect.
▲ “... her heart began to beat with immoderate 
desire”
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
264
her mind a blank.
Her husband returned at about seven o’clock. He had found nothing.
He went to the police station, called at newspaper offices where he  
advertised a reward, toured the cab companies, and tried anywhere where 
the faintest of hopes led him. She waited for him all day long in the same 
distracted condition, thinking of the appalling catastrophe which had 
befallen them.
Loisel came back that evening, hollow-cheeked and very pale. He had not 
come up with anything.
‘Look,’ he said, ‘you’ll have to write to your friend and say you broke the 
catch on her necklace and you are getting it repaired. That’ll give us time to 
work out what we’ll have to do.’
She wrote to his dictation.
A week later they had lost all hope.
Loisel, who had aged five years, said: ‘We’ll have to start thinking about 
replacing the necklace.’
The next day they took the case in which it had come and called on the 
jeweller whose name was inside. He looked through his order book.
‘It wasn’t me that sold the actual necklace. I only supplied the case.’
After this, they trailed round jeweller’s shops, looking for a necklace just  
like the other one, trying to remember it, and both ill with worry and  
anxiety.
In a shop in the Palais Royal they found a diamond collar which they 
thought was identical to the one they were looking for. It cost forty thousand 
francs. The jeweller was prepared to let them have it for thirty-six.
They asked him not to sell it for three days. And they got him to agree to 
take it back for thirty-four thousand if the one that had been lost turned up 
before the end of February.
Loisel had eighteen thousand francs which his father had left him. He would 
have to borrow the rest.
He borrowed the money, a thousand francs here, five hundred there, 
sometimes a hundred and as little as sixty. He signed notes, agreed to pay 
exorbitant rates of interest, resorted to usurers and the whole tribe of 
moneylenders. He mortgaged the rest of his life, signed papers without 
knowing if he would ever be able to honour his commitments, and then, sick 
with worry about the future, the grim poverty which stood ready to pounce, 
and the prospect of all the physical privation and mental torture ahead, 
he went round to the jeweller’s to get the new necklace with the thirty-six 
thousand francs which he put on the counter.
When Madame Loisel took it round, Madame Forestier said in a huff: ‘You 
ought really to have brought it back sooner. I might have needed it.’
She did not open the case, as her friend had feared she might. If she had 
noticed the substitution, what would she have thought? What would she 
have said? Would she not have concluded she was a thief?
▶
▲ Shops in Palais Royale, Paris
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
265
Then began for Madame Loisel the grindingly horrible life of the very poor. 
But quickly and heroically, she resigned herself to what she could not alter: 
their appalling debt would have to be repaid. She was determined to pay. 
They dismissed the maid. They moved out of their apartment and rented an 
attic room.
She became used to heavy domestic work and all kinds of ghastly kitchen 
chores. She washed dishes, wearing down her pink nails on the greasy pots 
and saucepans. She washed the dirty sheets, shirts, and floorcloths by hand 
and hung them up to dry on a line; each morning she took the rubbish down 
to the street and carried the water up, pausing for breath on each landing. 
And, dressed like any working-class woman, she shopped at the fruiterer’s, 
the grocer’s, and the butcher’s, with a basket over her arm, haggling, 
frequently abused and always counting every penny.
Each month they had to settle some accounts, renew others, and bargain for 
time.
Her husband worked in the evenings doing accounts for a shopkeeper and 
quite frequently sat up into the early hours doing copying work at five sous a 
page.
They lived like this for ten years.
By the time ten years had gone by, they had repaid everything, with not a 
penny outstanding, in spite of the extortionate conditions and including the 
accumulated interest.
Madame Loisel looked old now. She had turned into the battling, hard, 
uncouth housewife who rules working-class homes. Her hair was untidy, her 
skirts were askew, and her hands were red. She spoke in a gruff voice and 
scrubbed floors on her hands and knees. But sometimes, when her husband 
had gone to the office, she would sit by the window and think of that evening 
long ago when she had been so beautiful and so admired.
What might not have happened had she not lost the necklace? Who could 
tell? Who could possibly tell? Life is so strange, so fickle! How little is needed 
to make or break us!
One Sunday, needing a break from her heavy working week, she went out 
for a stroll on the Champs-Elysées. Suddenly she caught sight of a woman 
pushing a child in a pram. It was Madame Forestier, still young, still 
beautiful, and still attractive.
Madame Loisel felt apprehensive. Should she speak to her? Yes, why not? 
Now that she had paid in full, she would tell her everything. Why not? She 
went up to her.
‘Hello, Jeanne.’
The friend did not recognize her and was taken aback at being addressed 
so familiarly by a common woman in the street. She stammered: ‘But… I’m 
sorry… I don’t know… There’s some mistake.’
‘No mistake. I’m Madame Loisel.’
Her friend gave a cry: ‘But my poor Mathilde, how you’ve changed!’
‘Yes, I’ve been through some hard times since I saw you, very hard times. 
And it was all on your account.’
▶
sous Coins of very small value.
Champs-Elysées A famous street in Paris.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
266
‘On my account? Whatever do you mean?’
‘Do you remember that diamond necklace you lent me to go to the reception 
at the Ministry?’
‘Yes. What about it?’
‘Well I lost it.’
‘Lost it? But you returned it to me.’
‘No, I returned another one just like it. And we’ve been paying for it these 
past ten years. You know, it wasn’t easy for us. We had nothing… But it’s 
over and done with now, and I’m glad.’
Madame Forestier stopped. ‘You mean you bought a diamond necklace to 
replace mine?’
‘Yes. And you never noticed the difference, did you? They were exactly alike.’ 
And she smiled a proud, innocent smile.
Madame Forestier looked very upset and, taking both her hands in hers, said:
‘Oh, my poor Mathilde! But it was only an imitation necklace. It couldn’t 
have been worth much more than five hundred francs!…’
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
The story has a lot in common with the fairytale, Cinderella, but the outcome 
is completely different. Everything hinges on the surprise ending, but the 
effectiveness of this depends on the events which lead up to it and, in 
particular, on the characters involved. Of these, Madame Loisel is the most 
important and the most controversial. You will need to understand her 
character well in order to answer examination questions.
In the first few sentences of the story, we learn that Madame Loisel is young 
and attractive, and, whilst not rich, she is certainly not poor. Why then, is she 
‘unhappy all the time’ (line 23)? Copy and complete the table, making a list 
of the reasons you can find for her unhappiness, using the first section (up to 
line 52). 
▼  REASON
▼  SUPPORTING QUOTATION
▼  EFFECT
Her background and 
family were very 
ordinary.
‘She is one of those who get 
themselves born the daughters 
of very minor civil servants.’
She has no possibility 
of marrying a rich or 
important man.
She has charm and 
beauty but is relatively 
poor.
 
 
She feels degraded and 
undervalued. 
She feels she is a victim 
of the strict order of 
society.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
267
Most readers blame Madame Loisel for what happens, though some 
sympathise with her. You need to decide what your own view is. Read through 
the story and note all the occasions when you consider her to be a victim, and 
all those when you think she is responsible for her own problems. Remember 
to find a quotation to support each of your points.
Copy and complete the following table, balancing out the arguments for and 
against and adding some points of your own. Find quotations to support each 
of your own points. You will probably have more points in one column than the 
other.
▼ MADAME LOISEL
▼ POINTS IN HER FAVOUR
▼ POINTS AGAINST HER
She deserves more than society offers her 
– her birth is an ‘error of Fate.’ 
She is vain and frivolous – she had no fine 
dresses and no jewellery, and that was all 
she cared about.
Her husband is rather boring and too 
‘careful with his money’.
She is ungrateful to a thoughtful husband. 
Her suffering is not related to what 
she did; it is unfair that she loses all 
her beauty whereas Madame Forestier 
remains ‘still young, still beautiful’.
She is the victim of her own pride; she 
could have simply told her friend the truth 
but did not want to lose face. 
Her hard work at the end makes her 
admirable – ‘quickly and heroically, she 
resigned herself to what she could not 
alter’.
Yes, she does make up for her mistake – 
but this does not mean she did not deserve 
what happened to her. 
 
 
 
▶ Having considered all the evidence, what is your overall opinion of Madame 
Loisel and how Maupassant has presented her?
The other characters are not so developed, although Monsieur Loisel is the 
most important. Here are two candidates’ views of him. With which do you 
agree and why?
STUDENT A
Monsieur Loisel is a loving husband, who is presented 
by the writer as both generous and indulgent. He goes 
to great lengths to get the invitation to the occasion 
and even sleeps in a separate room while his wife 
enjoys the dancing. When faced with the problems 
caused by the loss of the necklace, he works hard with 
his wife to pay for the new necklace. He never criticises 
her. He is her victim.
Monsieur Loisel is only a junior clerk without any 
kind of ambition. He loves his wife but has no real 
understanding of her or what her hopes must be; he is 
out of his depth with her. At the end he is as stubbornly 
proud as his wife and, instead of suggesting that she 
simply tells the truth, he accepts their joint fate. They 
are equally responsible for what happens.
STUDENT B
Madame Forestier, Madame Loisel’s friend, is not written about in detail. While 
she shows some kindness by loaning the necklace, she doesn’t tell Madame 
Loisel that it is an imitation and is quite sharp when it is returned late. At the 
end of the story, is she really sympathetic or is she mocking Madame Loisel? 
Ironically, she is exactly the kind of woman that Madame Loisel, at the start of 
the story, had hoped to be.
KEY POINT
Maupassant’s moral world is not 
simple. The reader is drawn into 
making judgements but immediately 
has them challenged by another point 
of view.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
268
Because this is a translation, you are not commenting directly on the writer’s 
use of language. However, some points about language can be made.
 
◼
Look for contrasts, such as that between the rich and sophisticated language 
used to describe Madame Loisel’s dreams and her experiences at the party 
(‘She danced ecstatically, wildly, intoxicated with pleasure…’) compared with 
the blunter and more direct language used to emphasise the extent of her 
poverty after the necklace is lost (‘Her hair was untidy … her hands were red’).
 
◼
Dialogue is used to illustrate character, such as the homeliness of her 
husband: ‘Ah! Stew! Splendid! There’s nothing I like better…’. It is also used 
to create drama. For example, look at the exchange between Madame 
Loisel and Madame Forestier at the very end.
Find some more examples to illustrate these points.
How does the writer try to make the character of Madame Loisel interesting for 
the reader in ‘The Necklace’?
In your answer, you should write about:
 
◼
the way she is presented up to the loss of the necklace
 
◼
her relationship with her husband up to the loss of the necklace
 
◼
the changes after the loss of the necklace
 
◼
the use of language.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
In a small group or pairs, consider the following ideas about the themes 
of The Necklace.
‘The story is about fate and its unfairness and uncertainty.’
‘The story shows us that honesty is always the best policy.’
‘The story is about vanity and shows that pride comes before a fall.’
‘The story is about social class and the problems of being born into a 
poor family.’
Discuss these views with your partner or your group, answering the 
following questions.
 
▶ Which of these statements do you think is the most accurate 
description of ‘The Necklace’? Is the story about anything else?
 
▶ Some readers say that, in ‘The Necklace’, Maupassant is making fun 
of his characters and that he hates women. Do you agree?
▼  THEMES OF THE NECKLACE
ACTIVITY 1
SKILLS
COLLABORATION, REASONING, 
INTERPRETATION, NEGOTIATION
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
AO1
AO2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
In the story, Mathilde seems to be trapped by society. To what extent 
do you think women in today’s world are trapped by society? Write an 
essay explaining your views on this subject.
▼  WRITING TASK
ACTIVITY 2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
269
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 What do you think might be difficult about welcoming strangers into 
your homes?
2 How would you try to help a child who was suddenly left in your care 
by a parent who was fleeing abroad? What considerations would be the 
most important?
3 Have you ever explored or visited a place that was totally unfamiliar to 
you? What did you find? What did you learn?
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Rose Tremain is an established and very successful English 
novelist who seeks out the strange, the unfamiliar and the 
near-unknowable as subjects for her fiction. ‘Significant 
Cigarettes’ is an extract from her novel, The Road Home. It tells 
the story of a journey of a desperately poor man called Lev. He 
travels from Eastern Europe to London, where he hopes to make 
a better life for himself. Before Lev left his own country, his wife 
had died. In order to make the journey he has to leave his young 
daughter behind.
The arrival in Britain of large numbers of migrants who want to 
find work has caused concern and anger among some people. In 
‘Significant Cigarettes’, Tremain shows us something of what it is 
like to be poor, homeless and desperate.
‘SIGNIFICANT CIGARETTES’ (FROM THE ROAD HOME)
ROSE TREMAIN
▶
On the coach, Lev chose a seat near the back and he sat huddled against the 
window, staring out at the land he was leaving: at the fields of sunflowers 
scorched by the dry wind, at the pig farms, at the quarries and rivers and at 
the wild garlic growing green at the edge of the road.
Lev wore a leather jacket and jeans and a leather cap pulled low over his 
eyes and his handsome face was grey-toned from his smoking and in his 
hands he clutched an old red cotton handkerchief and a dented pack of 
Russian cigarettes. He would soon be forty-three.
After some miles, as the sun came up, Lev took out a cigarette and stuck 
it between his lips, and the woman sitting next to him, a plump, contained 
person with moles like splashes of mud on her face, said quickly: ‘I’m sorry, 
but there is no smoking allowed on this bus.’
Lev knew this, had known it in advance, had tried to prepare himself mentally 
for the long agony of it. But even an unlit cigarette was a companion – 
something to hold on to, something that had promise in it – and all he could 
▼  ‘SIGNIFICANT CIGARETTES’ BY ROSE TREMAIN
▶
▲ Novelist Rose Tremain has said that she aims 
to attain a “new clarity” through her books for 
both herself and her readers
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
270
be bothered to do now was to nod, just to show the woman that he’d heard 
what she’d said, reassure her that he wasn’t going to cause trouble; because 
there they would have to sit for fifty hours or more, side by side with their 
separate aches and dreams, like a married couple. They would hear each 
other’s snores and sighs, smell the food and drink each had brought with them, 
note the degree to which each was fearful or unafraid, make short forays 
into conversation. And then later, when they finally arrived in London, they 
would probably separate with barely a word or a look, walk out into a rainy 
morning, each alone and beginning a new life. And Lev thought how all of this 
was odd but necessary and already told him things about the world he was 
travelling to, a world in which he would break his back working – if only that 
work could be found. He would hold himself apart from other people, find 
corners and shadows in which to sit and smoke, demonstrate that he didn’t 
need to belong, that his heart remained in his own country.
There were two coach-drivers. These men would take turns to drive and to 
sleep. There was an on-board lavatory, so the only stops the bus would make 
would be for gas. At gas stations, the passengers would be able to clamber 
off, walk a few paces, see wild flowers on a verge, soiled paper among 
bushes, sun or rain on the road. They might stretch up their arms, put on 
dark glasses against the onrush of nature’s light, look for a clover leaf, smoke 
and stare at the cars rushing by. Then they would be herded back onto the 
coach, resume their old attitudes, arm themselves for the next hundred miles, 
for the stink of another industrial zone, or the sudden gleam of a lake, for 
rain and sunset and the approach of darkness on silent marshes. There would 
be times when the journey would seem to have no end.
Sleeping upright was not something Lev was practised in. The old seemed to 
be able to do it, but forty-two was not yet old. Lev’s father, Stefan, sometimes 
used to sleep upright, in summer, on a hard wooden chair in his lunch break 
at the Baryn sawmill, with the hot sun falling onto the slices of sausage 
wrapped in paper on his knee and onto his flask of tea. Both Stefan and Lev 
could sleep lying down on a mound of hay or on the mossy carpet of a forest. 
Often, Lev had slept on a rag rug beside his daughter’s bed, when she was 
ill or afraid. And when his wife, Marina, was dying, he’d lain for five nights 
on an area of linoleum flooring no wider than his outstretched arm, between 
Marina’s hospital bed and a curtain patterned with pink and purple daisies, 
and sleep had come and gone in a mystifying kind of way, painting strange 
pictures in Lev’s brain that had never completely vanished.
Towards evening, after two stops for gas, the mole-flecked woman unwrapped 
a hard-boiled egg. She peeled it silently. The smell of the egg reminded Lev 
of the sulphur springs at Jor, where he’d taken Marina, just in case nature 
could cure what man had given up for lost. Marina had immersed her body 
obediently in the scummy water, lain there looking at a female stork returning 
to its high nest, and said to Lev: ‘If only we were storks.’
‘Why d’you say that?’ Lev had asked.
‘Because you never see a stork dying. It’s as though they didn’t die.’
If only we were storks.
On the woman’s knee a clean cotton napkin was spread and her white hands 
smoothed it and she unwrapped rye bread and a twist of salt.
‘My name is Lev,’ said Lev.
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
271
‘My name is Lydia,’ said the woman. And they shook hands, Lev’s hand 
holding the scrunched-up kerchief, and Lydia’s hand rough with salt and 
smelling of egg, and then Lev asked: ‘What are you planning to do in England?’ 
and Lydia said: ‘I have some interviews in London for jobs as a translator.’
‘That sounds promising.’
‘I hope so. I was a teacher of English at School 237 in Yarbl, so my language 
is very colloquial.’
Lev looked at Lydia. It wasn’t difficult to imagine her standing in front of 
a class and writing words on a blackboard. He said: ‘I wonder why you’re 
leaving our country when you had a good job at School 237 in Yarbl?’
‘Well,’ said Lydia. ‘I became very tired of the view from my window. Every 
day, summer and winter, I looked out at the school yard and the high fence 
and the apartment block beyond, and I began to imagine I would die seeing 
these things, and I didn’t want this. I expect you understand what I mean?’
Lev took off his leather cap and ran his fingers through his thick grey hair. 
He saw Lydia turn to him for a moment and look very seriously into his eyes.
He said: ‘Yes, I understand.’
Then there was a silence, while Lydia ate her hard-boiled egg. She chewed 
very quietly. When she’d finished the egg, Lev said: ‘My English isn’t too 
bad. I took some classes in Baryn, but my teacher told me my pronunciation 
wasn’t very good. May I say some words and you can tell me if I’m 
pronouncing them correctly?’
‘Yes, of course,’ said Lydia.
Lev said: ‘Lovely. Sorry. I am legal. How much please. Thank you. May you 
help me.’
‘May I help you,’ corrected Lydia. ‘May I help you,’ repeated Lev.
‘Go on,’ said Lydia.
‘Stork,’ said Lev. ‘Stork’s nest. Rain. I am lost. I wish for an interpreter. Bee-
and-bee.’
‘Be-and-be?’ said Lydia. ‘No, no. You mean “to be, or not to be”.
‘No,’ said Lev. ‘Bee-and-bee. Family hotel, quite cheap.’
‘Oh, yes, I know. B & B.’
Lev could now see that darkness was falling outside the window and he 
thought how, in his village, darkness had always arrived in precisely the same 
way, from the same direction, above the same trees, whether early or late, 
whether in summer, winter or spring, for the whole of his life. This darkness 
– particular to that place, Auror – was how, in Lev’s heart, darkness would 
always fall. And so he told Lydia that he came from Auror, had worked in the 
Baryn sawmill until it closed two years ago, and since then he’d found no work 
at all and his family – his mother, his five-year-old daughter and he – had lived 
off the money his mother made selling jewellery manufactured from tin.
‘Oh,’ said Lydia. ‘I think that’s very resourceful, to make jewellery from tin.’
‘Sure,’ said Lev. ‘But it isn’t enough.’
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
272
Tucked into his boot was a small flask of vodka. He extracted the flask and 
took a long swig. Lydia kept eating her rye bread. Lev wiped his mouth with 
the red handkerchief and saw his face reflected in the coach window. He 
looked away. Since the death of Marina, he didn’t like to catch sight of his 
own reflection, because what he always saw in it was his own guilt at still 
being alive.
‘Why did the sawmill at Baryn close?’ asked Lydia.
‘They ran out of trees,’ said Lev.
‘Very bad,’ said Lydia. ‘What other work can you do?’
Lev drank again. Someone had told him that in England vodka was too 
expensive to drink.
Immigrants made their own alcohol from potatoes and tap water, and when 
Lev thought about these industrious immigrants, he imagined them sitting by 
a coal fire in a tall house, talking and laughing, with rain falling outside the 
window and red buses going past and a television flickering in a corner of 
the room. He sighed and said: ‘I will do any work at all. My daughter Maya 
needs clothes, shoes, books, toys, everything. England is my hope.’
Towards ten o’clock, red blankets were given out to the coach passengers, 
some of whom were already sleeping. Lydia put away the remnants of her 
meal, covered her body with the blanket and switched on a fierce little light 
above her under the baggage rack and began reading a faded old paperback, 
printed in English. Lev saw that the title of her book was The Power and the 
Glory. His longing for a cigarette had grown steadily since he’d drunk the 
vodka and now it was acute. He could feel the yearning in his lungs and in 
his blood, and his hands grew fidgety and he felt a tremor in his legs. How 
long before the next gas stop? It could be four or five hours. Everyone on 
the bus would be asleep by then, except him and one of the two drivers. 
Only they would keep a lonely, exhausting vigil, the driver’s body tensed to 
the moods and alarms of the dark, unravelling road; his own aching for the 
comfort of nicotine or oblivion – and getting neither.
He envied Lydia, immersed in her English book. Lev knew he had to distract 
himself with something…. In desperation, he took from his wallet a brand 
new British twenty-pound note and reached up and switched on his own 
little reading light and began to examine the note. On one side, the frumpy 
Queen, E II R, with her diadem, her face grey on a purple ground, and on the 
other, a man, some personage from the past, with a dark drooping moustache 
and an angel blowing a trumpet above him and all the angel’s radiance 
falling on him in vertical lines. ‘The British venerate their history,’ Lev had 
been told in his English class, ‘chiefly because they have never been subjected 
to Occupation. Only intermittently do they see that some of their past deeds 
were not good.’
The indicated lifespan of the man on the note was 1857–1934. He looked 
like a banker, but what had he done to be on a twenty-pound note in the 
twenty-first century? Lev stared at his determined jaw, squinted at his name 
written out in a scrawl beneath the wing collar, but couldn’t read it. He 
thought that this was a person who would never have known any other 
system of being alive but Capitalism. He would have heard the names Hitler 
and Stalin, but not been afraid – would have had no need to be afraid of 
anything except a little loss of capital in what Americans called the Crash, 
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
273
when men in New York had jumped out of windows and off roofs. He would 
have died safely in his bed before London was bombed to ruins, before 
Europe was torn apart. Right to the end of his days, the angel’s radiance 
had probably shone on this man’s brow and on his fusty clothes, because it 
was known across the world: the English were lucky. Well, thought Lev, I’m 
going to their country now and I’m going to make them share it with me: 
their infernal luck. I’ve left Auror and that leaving of my home was hard and 
bitter, but my time is coming.
‘Significant Cigarettes’ is an extract from a novel. This means that we should 
not simply read it as an account of events but as a piece of writing designed 
to draw us in to the novel’s characters and themes. In this piece we learn 
about Lev and Lydia and the things that concern them, themes which may be 
important in the novel from which this extract is taken. 
The author provides a contrast between two characters who are travelling side 
by side, for some days, on a bus. We are told about their lives back home 
and their reasons for travelling, and we are provided with an insight into their 
expectations of life when they arrive in London. This information encourages 
us to imagine how they will cope at their journey’s end. 
Copy and complete the following table, identifying as many themes from the 
passage as you can and add examples of each from the text. 
▼  THEME
▼  EXAMPLE FROM THE TEXT
Departure and leaving things behind 
‘huddled against the window, staring out 
at the land he was leaving’
Travelling companions
 
Never-ending travel
 
Desperation
 
England and the English
 
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
The writer arranges the text to help us explore important aspects of the 
story. Events on the journey lead us through Lev’s thoughts, providing an 
apparently natural opportunity to hear about the life he has left behind and 
what he imagines life will be like once he reaches London. When he sees that 
it is getting dark outside, he is reminded of the way in which night falls in his 
village, and these memories give the reader an insight into Lev’s background.
There is a contrast too between the confident speech of Lydia and Lev’s 
requests for help with the English language.
The words and phrases used by a writer affect the way in which we see and 
understand things. For example, Lydia speaks first: ‘I’m sorry, but there is no 
smoking allowed on this bus.’ She apologises for speaking to him – ‘I’m sorry’ 
– then adds words which suggest that she feels that she should point out the 
ban on smoking. This is different from, ‘No smoking on the bus,’ or, ‘Don’t 
think you’re going to smoke next to me.’ Later, Lev’s craving for a cigarette 
grows and a number of the symptoms are shown in striking words and phrases 
(‘his hands grew fidgety’), and a succession of sentences ending with a much 
longer sentence that reflect his growing urge to smoke. The cigarettes provide 
EXPLORING LANGUAGE 
▲  “I’m going to their country now and I’m going 
to make them share it with me ...”
KEY POINT
It is important to realise that this is a 
scene from the early part of a novel, 
not a text designed to stand alone.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
274
a symbol, a reminder of what Lev desperately wants to do, but may not do on 
the bus. This inability to act is contrasted with Lydia’s confident use of English 
when she makes clear that smoking is not permitted.
What things trouble Lev during his journey? Copy and complete the following 
table, listing them and finding evidence in the text to back them up. 
▼  WHAT TROUBLES LEV?
▼  EVIDENCE
Leaving his home country
‘Staring out at the land he was leaving’
How does the writer create feelings of nostalgia in ‘Significant Cigarette’?
In your answer, you should write about:
 
◼
the dialogue between characters
 
◼
Lev’s memories and thoughts
 
◼
The use of language.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
SKILLS
INTERPERSONAL SKILLS,  
NEGOTIATION
Discuss the effect that Lydia has on Lev. Why do you think that their 
meeting and travelling together is important in this extract and perhaps 
in the novel as a whole?
▼  FUNCTION OF AN EXTRACT WITHIN THE NOVEL
ACTIVITY 1
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
AO1
AO2
Write the sort of article that Lev might write to a newspaper or magazine 
back in his home country, in which he advises people there who might 
be considering coming to Britain to find work.
Write about a strange journey with an unusual companion.
▼  WRITING TASKS
ACTIVITY 2
How does the writer bring out Lev’s uncertainty in ‘Significant Cigarettes’? In 
your answer, you should write about:
 
◼
the dialogue between Lev and Lydia
 
◼
Lydia’s confidence
 
◼
the setting, the transition between home and a new country.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, 
ANALYSIS, REASONING, 
INTERPRETATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
275
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Read about the Gothic novel and find out about some of its more 
famous examples, such as Horace Walpole’s The Castle of Otranto and 
Ann Radcliffe’s The Mysteries of Udolpho.
2 There are several movie adaptations of The Woman in Black. Try to 
watch one as a class, paying particular attention to the way in which the 
story’s background is shown and how an atmosphere of eeriness and 
suspense is created.
3 Do you believe in ghosts and the supernatural? Talk about some of the 
ghost stories you know from the folklore of your country and culture. 
What are their common features? Are they similar or different to the 
typical stories of the Gothic tradition?
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Susan Hill is an English writer of literary novels, ghost stories, 
children’s books, detective novels and memoirs. She has won the 
Whitbread, Somerset Maugham and John Llewellyn Rhys awards 
and has been shortlisted for the Booker Prize. She is known for 
writing in the Gothic style with its distinctive creation of suspense 
through a description of background and atmosphere.
The Woman in Black is probably the most well-known of her 
ghost stories written in this tradition and its stage production is 
the second longest running play in London’s West End. 
The novel is the story of Arthur Kipps and is narrated in the first 
person. 
It recounts his experiences in the town of Crythin Gifford when he 
was a young junior solicitor. The story centres around Eel Marsh 
House, where unexplained noises are heard and the ghostly 
figure of the Woman in Black is sighted. Kipps later learns that 
this is the ghost of Jennet Humfrye, a woman whose son died in 
an accident on the marshes, and that her appearance foretells 
the death of a child. Kipps’s involvement in events at Eel Marsh 
House ultimately lead to the deaths of his wife and child.
‘WHISTLE AND I’LL COME TO YOU’ (FROM THE  
WOMAN IN BLACK) SUSAN HILL
During the night the wind rose. As I had lain reading I had become aware of 
the stronger gusts that blew every so often against the casements. But when 
I awoke abruptly in the early hours it had increased greatly in force. The 
house felt like a ship at sea, battered by the gale that came roaring across the 
▶
casements Windows that are set on hinges 
and open like doors.
GENERAL VOCABULARY
Booker Prize prestigious British award 
given for outstanding literary works in 
English
London’s West End an area of London 
where a number of good quality 
professional theatres are located
▼  ‘WHISTLE AND I’LL COME TO YOU’ BY SUSAN HILL
▲  English writer Susan Hill
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
276
open marsh. Windows were rattling everywhere and there was the sound of 
moaning down all the chimneys of the house and whistling through every 
nook and cranny.
At first I was alarmed. Then, as I lay still, gathering my wits, I reflected on 
how long Eel Marsh House had stood here, steady as a lighthouse, quite 
alone and exposed, bearing the brunt of winter after winter of gales and 
driving rain and sleet and spray. It was unlikely to blow away tonight. And 
then, those memories of childhood began to be stirred again and I dwelt 
nostalgically upon all those nights when I had lain in the warm and snug 
safety of my bed in the nursery at the top of our family house in Sussex, 
hearing the wind rage round like a lion, howling at the doors and beating 
upon the windows but powerless to reach me. I lay back and slipped into 
that pleasant, trance-like state somewhere between sleeping and waking, 
recalling the past and all its emotions and impressions vividly, until I felt I 
was a small boy again.
Then from somewhere, out of that howling darkness, a cry came to my ears, 
catapulting me back into the present and banishing all tranquility.
I listened hard. Nothing. The tumult of the wind, like a banshee, and the 
banging and rattling of the window in its old, ill-fitting frame. Then yes, 
again, a cry, that familiar cry of desperation and anguish, a cry for help from 
a child somewhere out on the marsh.
There was no child. I knew that. How could there be? Yet how could I lie 
here and ignore even the crying of some long dead ghost?
‘Rest in peace,’ I thought, but this poor one did not, could not. 
After a few moments I got up. I would go down into the kitchen and make 
myself a drink, stir up the fire a little and sit beside it trying, trying to shut 
out that calling voice for which I could do nothing, and no one had been able 
to do anything for… how many years?
As I went out onto the landing, Spider the dog following me at once, two 
things happened together. I had the impression of someone who had just 
that very second before gone past me on their way from the top of the stairs 
to one of the other rooms, and, as a tremendous blast of wind hit the house 
so that it all but seemed to rock at the impact, the lights went out. I had not 
bothered to pick up my torch from the bedside table and now I stood in the 
pitch blackness, unsure for a moment of my bearings.
And the person who had gone by, and who was now in this house with me? 
I had seen no one, felt nothing. There had been no movement, no brush of 
a sleeve against mine, no disturbance of the air, I had not even heard a foot 
step. I had simply the absolutely certain sense of someone just having passed 
close to me and gone away down the corridor. Down the short narrow 
corridor that led to the nursery whose door had been so firmly locked and 
then, inexplicably, opened.
For a moment, I actually began to conjecture that there was indeed someone 
– another human being – living here in this house, a person who hid 
themselves away in that mysterious nursery and came out at night to fetch 
food and drink and to take the air. Perhaps it was the woman in black? 
Had Mrs Drablow harboured some reclusive old sister or retainer, had she 
left behind her a mad friend that no one had known about? My brain span 
all manner of wild, incoherent fantasies as I tried desperately to provide a 
▶
marsh An area of low-lying land that 
generally remains flooded all year round.
nook and cranny An idiom pair that 
means every possible place.
nostalgically thinking about a pleasure 
from the past.
banshee In Irish folklore, a female spirit 
whose wailing warns of an impending death.
anguish Severe mental or physical 
suffering.
conjecture An opinion formed on the basis 
of incomplete information.
Mrs. Drablow Owner of Eel Marsh 
House; it was to sort out the legal matters 
arising from her death that the narrator had 
come to Crythin Gifford.
retainer A person attached or owing 
service to a household; a servant.
▲  Susan Hill’s ghost stories are distinctive for 
their creation of suspense
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
277
rational explanation for the presence I had been so aware of. But then they 
ceased. There was no living occupant of Eel Marsh House other than myself 
and Samuel Daily’s dog. Whatever was about, whoever I had seen, and heard 
rocking, and who had passed me by just now, whoever had opened the 
locked door was not ‘real’. No. But what was ‘real’? At that moment I began 
to doubt my own reality.
The first thing I must have was a light and I groped my way back across to 
my bed, reached over it and got my hand to the torch at last, took a step 
back, stumbled over the dog who was at my heels and dropped the torch. 
It went spinning away across the floor and fell somewhere by the window 
with a crash and the faint sound of breaking glass. I cursed but managed 
by crawling about on my hands and knees, to find it again and to press the 
switch. No light came on. The torch had broken. 
For a moment I was as near to weeping tears of despair and fear, frustration 
and tension, as I had ever been since my childhood. But instead of crying I 
drummed my fists upon the floorboards, in a burst of violent rage, until they 
throbbed.
It was Spider who brought me to my sense by scratching a little at my 
arm and then by licking the hand I stretched out to her. We sat on the 
floor together and I hugged her warm body to me, glad of her, thoroughly 
ashamed of myself, calmer and relieved, while the wind boomed and roared 
without, and again and again I heard that child’s terrible cry borne on the 
gusts towards me.
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
‘Whistle and I’ll Come to You’ is the title of the tenth chapter of The Woman 
in Black. This extract describes a night at Eel Marsh House and the ghostly 
happenings that worried the narrator. The text communicates the thoughts and 
feelings of the narrator as they shift from contemplating the harsh weather and 
reminiscing over his childhood, to extreme fear as he hears the wailing of the 
child and begins to strongly feel the presence of some being in the house. 
The atmosphere of the house is effectively conveyed not only through the vivid 
description, but also from the way that Arthur Kipps is ready to believe that 
there may even be a person hiding there. The willingness of the narrator to 
believe in the supernatural creates a similar reaction in the reader making the 
extract all the more powerful and evocative. 
Some of the themes in this extract are:
 
◼
isolation
 
◼
the supernatural
 
◼
fear
 
◼
a sense of the past.
Samuel Daily A prosperous landowner 
that Kipps meets on the train to Crythin 
Gifford.
KEY POINT
Think about these themes in the 
passage and any others you can draw 
out. Analyse how they work together to 
create the atmosphere.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
278
Copy and complete the following table, finding examples from the text which 
relate to the extract’s themes and commenting on the way in which these 
examples illustrate the theme. 
▼  THEME
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  COMMENT
Isolation 
 
 
 
 
 
‘…quite alone and 
exposed, bearing the 
brunt of winter after 
winter of gales…’ 
 
 
The house itself is isolated. The word 
‘exposed’ creates a sense of vulnerability 
that is enhanced by the fact that the 
house has had to survive the harsh 
elements. Ironically the narrator is trying 
to convince himself that the house is as 
‘steady as a lighthouse’.
The supernatural 
 
 
Fear 
 
 
A sense of the 
past
The Woman in Black has many, though not all, of the features of the Gothic 
novel. The following table lists some of these features. Copy and complete the 
table, commenting on whether each element is present or not. If it is present, 
find evidence from the text to support your claim. If the feature is not present 
or has been changed to some extent, explain why.
▼  FEATURE
▼  PRESENT 
OR ABSENT
 ▼  EVIDENCE OR EXPLANATION
Set in a castle
 
 
An atmosphere of mystery 
and suspense
 
 
An ancient prophecy  
 
 
Supernatural or mysterious 
events
 
 
High emotion 
 
 
Women in distress 
 
 
A woman threatened by a 
tyrannical male 
 
Absent 
 
 
The extract makes no reference to a 
female character being threatened. 
We only learn of Mrs Drablow, who 
owned the house.
Vocabulary associated with 
the Gothic and relating to 
mystery, fear, terror and 
darkness
Hill uses a variety of techniques to build atmosphere and to convey the 
text’s themes. Copy and complete the following table with examples of each 
technique, providing an explanation of its use. You may be able to spot more 
techniques than the ones which are mentioned.
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
279
▼  TECHNIQUE
▼  EXAMPLES
▼  COMMENT
Similes 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
Pairs of words 
 
 
 
 
1 ‘desperation and anguish’ 
 
2 
 
3 
This not only describes the 
pain contained in the cry 
but also hints at the terror 
that the narrator feels. 
 
Questions 
 
 
 
 
 
1 ‘But what was “real”?’ 
 
2 
 
3 
 
Connected to the theme 
of the supernatural, this 
question shows the doubt 
in the narrator’s mind 
and contributes to an 
atmosphere of fear and 
uncertainty. 
Powerful adjectives 
 
 
 
 
1 ‘howling darkness’ 
 
2 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
Short or incomplete 
sentences 
 
 
 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
Images
1
2 
Sometimes, writers use participle phrases as a technique. These can be 
present participle phrases (beginning with verbs ending in ‘-ing’, such as 
‘running’, ‘thinking’ and so on) or past participle phrases (beginning with verbs 
that have ‘-ed’ endings, such as ‘presented’, ‘created’ or irregular ones such 
as ‘driven’).
In the sentence beginning, ‘I lay back and slipped into that pleasant, trance-
like state…’, recalling the past is an action that happens while the narrator is 
lying back in bed. This participle phrase enables the reader to understand why 
the narrator felt like he was a child again.
In the same way, the sentence beginning, ‘We sat on the floor together and I 
hugged her warm body to me…’ shows the reader the narrator’s mental state. 
His physical action of hugging the dog makes the reader think of relief; it is the 
past participle phrase ‘ashamed of myself’ that indicates there is a sense of 
shame as well.
The technique is often used to give more information about happenings. This 
adds detail to a text and gives variety to sentence structure as well.
KEY POINT
An understanding of English grammar 
will better enable you to understand 
what the writer is trying to achieve.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
280
Make a list of some of the present participle phrases you can find in the text.
1 ‘howling at the doors’
2 __________________________________________________
3 __________________________________________________
4 __________________________________________________
5 __________________________________________________ 
▲  The Loch Ness Monster is part of Scottish 
folklore
SKILLS
 INNOVATION, COMMUNICATION, 
TEAMWORK, INTERPERSONAL 
SKILLS
‘Urban legends’ are modern day folklore that consist of largely fictional 
stories that have supernatural and/or frightening elements.
1 Discuss why it is important to be able to distinguish between fact and 
fiction in the many stories we hear and read every day. Try to include 
examples of hoaxes with which you are familiar. For example, you may 
have heard of the Loch Ness Monster, a creature said to live in a lake 
in the Scottish Highlands. Someone claimed to have photographed the 
Monster in 1934, but the photograph was proved a hoax in the 1990s.
2 An urban legend that comes from the USA is that of the Candy Lady. 
It is a connected to the history of Clara Crane, a woman who is said 
to have lived in a small town in Texas around the turn of the 20th 
century. The story goes that her daughter died in an accident which 
Clara blamed on her husband. She then murdered him by giving 
▼  URBAN LEGENDS
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
Structure is an effective technique in all types of writing and can be used 
to create tension and suspense in ghost stories. In this extract, suspense 
is built throughout to reach a climax, where the narrator drums his fists 
against the floor, and then to a sense of resolution, where he calms down.
Copy and complete the following table, listing the events and 
commenting on how each adds to the build-up of suspense. 
▼  STRUCTURE AS A TECHNIQUE
ACTIVITY 1
 ▼  EVENTS
▼  COMMENT
Reads a book and then goes to sleep 
 
 
Creates a sense of the ordinary, even though 
the weather is harsh. The sense of inner calm 
suggested here makes the change that occurs 
later more effective by contrast.
Wakes suddenly 
Brings a change. The fact that he woke 
suddenly hints that something might be wrong.
The force of the wind has increased 
 
Hears a cry 
 
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
281
Ann Radcliffe’s novel, The Italian, is the story of a nobleman called Vivaldi and 
his attempt to marry Elena, a beautiful orphan. With many obstacles to the 
proposed marriage, Vivaldi has to contend with mysterious monks, ghostly 
figures and the Holy Inquisition. The following extract shows the way in which 
Radcliffe creates the eerie atmosphere of a chamber in a ruined fortress where 
Vivaldi and his servant Paulo are trapped for the night.
FROM THE ITALIAN (1797) BY ANN RADCLIFFE
Vivaldi again examined the walls, and as unsuccessfully as before; but in 
one corner of the vault lay an object, which seemed to tell the fate of one 
who had been confined here, and to hint his own: it was a garment covered 
with blood. Vivaldi and his servant discovered it at the same instant; and 
a dreadful foreboding of their own destiny fixed them, for some moments, 
to the spot. Vivaldi first recovered himself, when instead of yielding to 
despondency, all his faculties were aroused to devise some means for 
escaping; but Paulo’s hopes seemed buried beneath the dreadful vestments 
upon which he still gazed. ‘Ah, my Signor!’ said he, at length, in a faltering 
accent, ‘who shall dare to raise that garment? What if it should conceal the 
mangled body whose blood has stained it!’
▶
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
KEY POINT
Our early childhood experiences 
inevitably have an influence on our 
outlook and so will influence your own 
writing.
poisoned sweets. Some years later, there were reports of children in 
the town finding candy on their window sills in the morning, and legend 
suggests that the children started disappearing. People blamed these 
disappearances on The Candy Lady.
In groups, prepare and present a short play about this urban legend. 
You could take on the roles of the adults and children of the Texan town 
and enact the disappearance of a child.
Read the extract below, in which Susan Hill describes the influence that 
her birthplace and childhood have had on her writing.
‘I was born beside the North Sea, in Scarborough, Yorkshire one 
bitterly cold winter during WWII, when the snow was deep and the 
waves were crashing onto the cliffs not far away.
How much do we carry with us of our birth – the when and the where? 
I certainly carry with me all the stories I was told about that day, that 
winter. But Scarborough, where I lived and rarely left until I was 16, is not 
the mere background but the whole setting of all my childhood memories. 
So many of my novels and short stories feature it, though always in 
disguise – feature the sea, and seaside places. Growing up in an unusual 
place gives a writer a big advantage because the imagination is stimulated 
and intrigued by everything in and about it from the beginning.’
Write a blog entry about a childhood experience or place that is very 
memorable or which has had a strong influence on you.
Write a short story entitled ‘The Deepest Shadow’.
▼  INFLUENCE OF CHILDHOOD
ACTIVITY 3
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
282
Vivaldi, shudderingly, turned to look on it again.
‘It moves!’ exclaimed Paulo; ‘I see it move!’ as he said which, he started to the 
opposite side of the chamber. Vivaldi stepped a few paces back, and as quickly 
returned; when, determined to know the event at once, he raised the garment 
upon the point of his sword, and perceived, beneath, other remains of dress, 
heaped high together, while even the floor below was stained with gore.
Below is a student’s answer to the question: ‘How is suspense created in the 
extract from The Italian?’
The extract from The Italian creates suspense through a range of techniques. 
First and foremost, it tells us that the character was looking for a way out 
‘unsuccessfully’. So we know he must be sort of really scared because he can’t find 
a way out. Then the writer gets us to focus on something really frightening – a bloody 
garment. This really brings suspense because now we are thinking, what can this be. 
Also the word ‘bloody’ gives a good visual image and creates danger and suspense.
▼  POSITIVES
▼  NEGATIVES
Points out specific techniques, such as 
visual imagery. 
Points are not developed. They are 
mentioned but the effect of each technique 
is not explained in detail.
Shows some evidence of structuring 
the answer with the phrase, ‘First and 
foremost’.
 
 
 
 
 
 
▲  The Woman in Black is considered part of the 
Gothic novel tradition
AO1
AO2
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
How does the writer of ‘Whistle and I’ll Come to You’ create an atmosphere of 
fear and suspense in the extract?
In your answer, you should write about:
 
◼
the setting and the weather
 
◼
the first person narrator’s thoughts and feelings
 
◼
the use of language.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
SKILLS
REASONING
Copy and complete the following table, listing the good and bad points 
of this student’s answer, then write an answer of your own. 
STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES
ACTIVITY 4
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
283
BEFORE YOU START READING
1 Many of us have siblings. Quite often our relationships with our siblings 
are complicated, especially in our teenage years. Talk about the 
advantages and disadvantages of having siblings.
2 Good physical health is something that we often take for granted. How 
would you feel if you were ill, not just for a few days, but for an extended 
period of time?
3 Read about Huron County, Ontario in Canada. What was life like in rural 
Canada in the 1940s and 1950s?
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
Alice Munro is a Canadian writer and Nobel Prize winner. She is 
best known for the changes that she introduced to the modern 
short story, particularly the way in which she moves the narrative 
between the past and the present. She has published several 
collections of short stories, including Dance of the Happy Shades 
(1968) and Open Secrets (1994). 
Her stories are often set in Huron County, Ontario, where she was 
born in 1931. Night appeared in the collection Dear Life, published 
in 2012 as the second of four stories in the section titled ‘Finale’. 
Munro herself called these ‘not quite stories’ in view of the fact that 
they are autobiographical writings with fictional elements. 
NIGHT
ALICE MUNRO
When I was young, there seemed to be never childbirth, or burst appendix 
or any other drastic physical event that did not occur simultaneously with a 
snowstorm. The roads would be closed, there was no question of digging out 
a car anyway, and some horses had to be hitched up to make their way into 
town to the hospital. It was just lucky that there were horses still around – in 
the normal course of events they would have been given up, but the war and 
gas rationing had changed all that, at least for the time being.
When the pain in my side struck, therefore it had to do so at about eleven 
o’clock at night, and a blizzard had to be blowing, and since we were not 
stabling any horses at the moment, the neighbours’ team had to be brought 
into action to take me to the hospital. A trip of no more than a mile and a 
half but an adventure all the same. The doctor was waiting, and to nobody’s 
surprise he prepared to take out my appendix. …
So I lay, minus my appendix, for some days looking out a hospital window at 
the snow sifting in a sombre way through some evergreens. I don’t suppose 
it ever crossed my head to wonder how my father was going to pay for this 
distinction. (I think he sold a woodlot that he had kept when he disposed of 
his father’s farm. He would have hoped to use it for trapping or sugaring. Or 
perhaps he felt an unmentionable nostalgia.)
▶
▶
The war… Refers to the rationing of fuel 
during World War II.
sugaring Boiling down of maple sap until it 
thickens into syrup or crystallises into sugar.
▼  NIGHT BY ALICE MUNRO
▲  Canadian short story writer Alice Munro won 
the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2013
KEY POINT
You can draw upon your own 
experiences in your writing but you can 
also be creative with that experience, 
changing events to explore what might 
have happened.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
284
Then I went back to school, and enjoyed being excused from physical 
training for longer than necessary, and one Saturday morning when my 
mother and I were alone in the kitchen she told me that my appendix had 
been taken out in the hospital, just as I thought, but it was not the only thing 
removed. The doctor had seen fit to take it out while he was at it, but the 
main thing that concerned him was a growth. A growth, my mother said, the 
size of a turkey’s egg. 
But don’t worry, she said, it’s all over now.
The thought of cancer had never entered my head and she never mentioned 
it. I don’t think there could be such a revelation today without some kind of 
question, some probing about whether it was or it wasn’t. Cancerous or benign 
– we would want to know at once. The only way I can explain our failure to 
speak of it was that there must have been a cloud around that word… 
So I did not ask and wasn’t told and can only suppose it was benign or was 
most skillfully got rid of, for here I am today. And so little do I think that all 
throughout my life when called upon to list my surgeries, I automatically say 
or write only ‘Appendix.’…
In the heat of early June I got out of school, having made good enough marks 
to free me from the final examination. I looked well, I did chores around the 
house, I read books as usual, nobody knew there was a thing the matter with 
me.
Now I have to describe the sleeping arrangements in the bedroom occupied 
by my sister and myself. It was a small room that could not accommodate 
two single beds side by side, so the solution was a pair of bunk beds with a 
ladder in place to help with whoever slept in the top bunk to climb into bed. 
That was me. When I had been younger and prone to teasing, I would lift up 
the corner of my thin mattress and threaten to spit on my little sister lying 
helpless in the bunk below. Of course my sister – her name was Catherine – 
was not really helpless. She could hide under her covers, but my game as to 
watch until suffocation or curiosity drove her out, and at that moment to spit 
or successfully pretend to spit on her bared face, enraging her.
I was too old for such fooling, certainly too old by this time. My sister was 
nine when I was fourteen. The relationship between us was always unsettled. 
When I wasn’t tormenting her, teasing her in some asinine way, I would take 
on the role of sophisticated counsellor or hair-raising story teller… I don’t 
mean to say that I was entirely in control of her, or even that our lives were 
constantly intertwined. She had her own friends, her own games. … 
In the month June, as I have said, I was free of school and left on my own 
as I don’t remember being in quite the same way in the other time of my 
growing up. I did some chores in the house, but my mother must have been 
well enough, as yet, to handle most of that work. Or perhaps we had just 
enough money at the time to hire what she – my mother – would call a 
maid, though everyone else said hired girl. I don’t remember, at any rate, 
having to tackle any of the jobs that piled up for me in later summers, when 
I fought quite willingly to maintain the decency of our house. It seems that 
the mysterious turkey egg must have given me some invalid status, so that I 
could spend part of the time wandering about like a visitor. 
Though not trailing any special clouds. Nobody in our family would have got 
away with that. It was all inward – this uselessness and strangeness I felt. …
▶
asinine Very stupid.
invalid A person who is weak due to illness 
or some injury.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
285
It must have been just that every moment of the day was not filled up with 
jobs, as it was summers before after.
So maybe that was the reason that I had begun to have trouble getting to 
sleep. At first, I think, that meant lying wide awake I was, with the rest of the 
household asleep. I would have read, and got tired the usual way, and turned 
out my light and waited. Nobody would have called out to me earlier, telling 
me to put out my light and get to sleep. For the first time ever (and this too 
must have marked a special status) I was left to make up my own mind about 
such a thing.
It took a while for the house to change from the light of day and from the 
household lights turned on late into the evening. Leaving behind the general 
clatter of things to be done, hung up, finished with, it became a stranger place 
in which people and the work that dictated their lives fell away, their uses for 
everything around them fell away, all the furniture retreated into itself and no 
longer existed because of nobody’s attention.
You might think this was liberation. At first, perhaps it was. The freedom. 
The strangeness. But as my failure to fall asleep prolonged itself, and as 
it finally took hold all together until it changed into the dawn, I became 
more and more disturbed by it. I started saying rhymes, then real poetry, 
first to make myself go under but then hardly of my own volition. The 
activity seemed to mock me. I was mocking myself, as the words turned into 
absurdity, into the silliest random speech.
I was not myself.
I had been hearing that said of people now and then, all my life, without 
thinking what it could mean.
So who do you think you are, then?
I had been hearing that too, without attaching to it any real menace, just 
taking it as a sort of routine jeering.
Think again.
By this time it wasn’t sleep I was after. I knew mere sleep wasn’t likely. 
Maybe not even desirable. Something was taking hold of me and it was my 
business, my hope to fight it off. I had the sense to do that, but only barely, as 
it seemed. Whatever it was was trying to tell me to do things, not exactly for 
any reason but just to see if such acts were possible. It was informing me that 
motives were not necessary.
It was only necessary to give in. How strange. Not out of revenge or for any 
normal reason, but just because you had thought of something.
And I did think of it. The more I chased the thought away, the more it 
came back. No vengeance, no hatred – as I have said, no reason, except 
something like an utterly cold deep thought that was an urging, more of a 
contemplation, could take possession of me. I must not even think of it but I 
did think of it.
The thought was there and hanging in my mind.
The thought that I could strangle my little sister, who was asleep in the bank 
below me and whom I loved more than anybody in the world.
I might do it not for jealousy, viciousness, or anger, but because of madness, 
▶
viciousness Deliberate cruelty or brutality.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
286
which could be lying right beside me there that night. Not a savage madness 
either, but something that could be almost teasing. A lazy, teasing, half-
sluggish suggestion that seemed to have been waiting a long time.
It might be saying why not. Why not try the worst?
The worst. Here in the most familiar place, the room where we had lain for 
all our lives and thought ourselves most safe. I might do it for no reason I or 
anybody could understand, except that I could not help it.
The thing to do was to get myself out of that room and out of that house. I 
went down the rungs of the ladder and never cast a single look at my sister 
where she slept. Then quietly down the stairs, nobody stirring, into the 
kitchen where everything was so familiar to that that I could not my way 
without a light. The kitchen door was not really locked – I am not even sure 
that we possessed a key. A chair was pushed under the door knob so that 
anyone trying to get in would make a great clatter. A slow careful removal of 
the chair could be managed without making any noise at all.
After the first night I was able to make my moves without a break, so that I 
could be outside, as it seemed, within a couple of smooth seconds. 
Of course there were no streetlights – we were too far from town.
Everything was larger. The trees around the house were always called by their 
names – the beech tree, the elm tree, the oak tree, the maples always spoken 
of in the plural and not differentiated, because they clung together. Now 
they were all intensely black. So were the white lilac tree (no longer with 
its blooms) and the purple lilac tree – always called lilac trees not bushes 
because they had grown too big.
The front and backside lawns were easy to negotiate because I had mown 
them myself with the idea of giving is some town like respectability. …
Back and forth I walked, first close to the house and then venturing here and 
there as I got to rely on my eyesight and could count on not bumping into 
the pump handle or the platform that supported the clothesline. The birds 
began to stir, and then sing – as if each of them had thought of it separately, 
up there in the trees. They woke far earlier than I would have thought 
possible. But soon after those earliest starting songs, there got to be a little 
whitening in the sky. And suddenly I would be overwhelmed with sleepiness. 
I went back into the house, where there was suddenly darkness everywhere, 
and I very properly, carefully, silently, set the tilted chair back under the 
knob, and went upstairs without a sound, managing doors and steps with the 
caution necessary, although I seemed already half asleep. I fell into my pillow, 
and I woke late – late in our house being around eight o’clock.
I would remember everything then, but it was so absurd – the bad part of it 
indeed was so absurd – that I could get rid of it fairly easily. My brother and 
sister had gone off to their classes in the public school, but their dishes were 
still on the table, a few bits of puffed rice floating in the excess milk. 
Absurd.
When my sister got home from school we would swing in the hammock, one 
of us at either end.
It was in that hammock that I spent much of the days, which possibly 
accounted for my not getting to sleep at night. And since I did not speak of 
▶
hammock A bed made of canvas or of 
rope mesh and suspended by cords at the 
ends, used as garden furniture or on board 
a ship.
▲  Alice Munro was inspired by her native Huron 
County, Ontario, Canada
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
287
my night difficulties, nobody came up with the simple information that I’d be 
better of getting more action during the day.
My troubles returned with the night of course. The demons got hold of me 
again. I knew enough soon to get up and out of my bunk without pretending 
that things would get better and that I would in fact go to sleep if I tried hard 
enough. I made my way as carefully out of the house as I had done before. I 
became able to find my way around more easily; even the inside of the rooms 
became more visible to me and yet more strange. … 
The east wall of the kitchen had no windows in it but it had a door opening 
on a stoop where we stood to hang out the heavy wet washing, and haul it in 
when it was dry and smelling all fresh and congratulatory, from white sheets 
to dark heavy overalls.
At that stoop, I sometimes halted in my night walks. I never sat down but it 
eased me to look toward the town, maybe just to inhale the sanity of it. All 
the people getting up before long, having their shops to go to, their doors to 
unlock and milk bottles to take inside, their busyness.
One night – I can’t say whether it could be the twentieth or the twelfth or 
only the eighth or the ninth that I had got up and walked – I got a sense, too 
late for me to change my pace, that there was somebody around the corner. 
There was somebody waiting there and I could do nothing but walk right on. 
I would be caught if I turned back, and it would be worse that way than to 
be confronted.
Who was it? Nobody but my father. He too sitting on the stoop looking 
towards town and that improbable faint light. He was dressed in his day 
clothes – dark work pants, the next thing to overalls but not quite, and dark, 
rough shirt and boots. He was smoking a cigarette. One he rolled himself of 
course. Maybe the cigarette smoke alerted me to another presence, though 
it’s possible that in those days the smell of tobacco smoke was everywhere, 
inside buildings and out, so there was no way to notice it.
He said good morning, in what might have seemed a natural way except that 
there was nothing natural about it. We weren’t accustomed to giving such 
greeting in our family. There was nothing hostile about this – it was just thought 
unnecessary, I suppose, when we would see each other off and on all day.
I said good morning back. And it must have been getting towards morning 
or my father would not have been dressed for a day’s work in that way. The 
sky may have been whitening but hidden still between the heavy trees. The 
birds singing, too. I had taken to staying away from my bunk bedstill later 
and later, even though I didn’t get comfort from doing so as I had at first. The 
possibilities that had once inhabited only the bedroom, the bunk bed till later 
and later, even though I didn’t get comfort from doing so as I had at first. The 
possibilities that had once inhabited only the bedroom, the bunk beds, were 
taking up the corners everywhere.
Now that I come to think of it, why wasn’t my father in his overalls? He was 
dressed as if he had to go into town for something, first thing in the morning.
I could not continue walking; the whole rhythm of it had been broken.
‘Having trouble sleeping?’ he said.
My impulse was to say no, but then I thought of the difficulties of explaining 
that I was just walking around, so I said yes.
He said that was often the case on summer nights.
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
288
‘You go to bed tired out and then just as you think you’re falling asleep 
you’re wide awake. Isn’t it that way?
I said yes.
I knew now that he had not heard me getting up and walking around on 
just this one night. The person whose livestock was on the premises, whose 
earnings such as they were lay all close by, and who kept a handgun in his 
desk drawer, was certainly going to stir at the slightest creeping into the stairs 
and the easiest turning of the knob.
I am not sure what conversation he meant to follow then, as regards of my 
being awake. He seems to have declared wakefulness to be a nuisance, but 
was that to be all? I certainly did not intend to tell him more. If he had given 
the slightest intimation that he knew there was more, if he’d even hinted that 
he had come here intending to hear it, I don’t think he’d have got anything 
out of me at all. I had to break the silence out of my own will, saying that I 
could not sleep. I had to get out of bed and walk.
Why was that?
I did not know.
Not bad dreams?
No.
‘Stupid question,’ he said. You wouldn’t get chased out of your bed on 
account of good dreams.
He let me wait to go on, he didn’t ask anything. I meant to back off but I 
kept talking. The truth was told with only the slightest modification.
When I spoke of my little sister I said that I was afraid I would hurt her. I 
believed that would be enough, that he would know enough of what I meant.
‘Strangle her,’ I said then. I could not stop myself after all.
Now I could not unsay it, I could not go back to the person I had been 
before.
My father had heard of it. He had heard that I thought myself capable – of, 
for no reason, strangling little Catherine in her sleep.
He said, ‘Well.’
Then he said not to worry. He said, ‘People have those kinds of thoughts 
sometimes.’
He said this quite seriously and without any sort of alarm or jumpy surprise. 
People have these kinds of thoughts or fears if you like, but there’s no real 
worry about it, no more than a dream, you could say.
He did not say, specifically, that I was in no danger of doing such a thing. He 
seemed more to be taking it for granted that such a thing could not happen. 
An effect of the ether, he said. Ether they gave you in the hospital. No more 
sense than a dream. It could not happen in the way that a meteor could not 
hit our house (of course it could, but the likelihood of its doing so put it in 
the category of couldn’t).
▶
intimation Indication or hint.
ether An anaesthetic gas used in the 19th 
and early 20th century.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
289
He did not blame me, though, for thinking if it. Did not wonder at me, was 
what he said.
There were other things he could have said. He could have questioned me 
further about my attitude to my little sister or my dissatisfactions with 
my life in general. If this were happening today, he might have made an 
appointment for me to see a psychiatrist. (I think that is what I might have 
done for a child, a generation and an income further on.)
The fact is that what he did worked as well. It set me down, but without 
either mockery or alarm, in the world we were living in.
People have thoughts they’d sooner not have. It happens in life.
If you live long enough as a parent nowadays, you discover that you have 
made mistakes you didn’t bother to know about along with the ones you do 
know about all too well. You are somewhat humbled at heart, sometimes 
disgusted with yourself. I don’t think my father felt anything like this. I do 
know that if I had ever taxed him, with his use on me of the razor strap or 
his belt, he might have said something about liking or lumping it. Those 
strappings, then, would have stayed in his mind, if they stayed at all, as no 
more than necessary and adequate curbing of a mouthy child’s imagining 
that she should rule the roost.
‘You thought you were too smart,’ was what he might have given as his 
reason for punishments, and indeed you heard often in those times, with 
the smartness figuring as an obnoxious imp that had to have the sass beaten 
out of him. Otherwise there was the risk of him growing up thinking he was 
smart. Or her, as the case might be.
However, on that breaking morning he gave me just what I needed to hear 
and what I was even to forget about soon enough.
I have thought that he was maybe in his better work clothes because he had 
a morning appointment to go to the bank, to learn, not to his surprise, that 
there was no extension to his loan. He had worked as hard as he could but 
the market was not going to turn around and he had to find a new way of 
supporting us as paying off what we owed at the same time. Or he may have 
found out that there was a name for my mother’s shakiness and that it was 
not going to stop. Or that he was in love with an impossible woman.
Never mind. From then on I could sleep.
According to the writer, Night is part of a ‘separate unit, one that is 
autobiographical in feeling, though not, sometimes, entirely so in fact’. This 
means that, though it is a short story, it is not the same as others in the genre. 
It borrows heavily from the writer’s own childhood experiences. The story, 
narrated from an adult’s point of view, in the first person, is both a narration of 
events unfolding and a present reflection on those past events.
‘Night’ shows us the interior world of the narrator. Her thoughts about her 
illness and its effects, her conflicted feelings about her sister and general 
reflections about her family and background, are all a part of the narrative. 
At the same time, the reader is shown a glimpse of life in rural Canada in the 
1950s and gains an understanding of the family relationships that have a 
significant impact on the narrator.
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT
like it or lump it An idiom that suggests 
you should accept unpleasant things you 
cannot change.
obnoxious Extremely unpleasant
sass (informal) Impudence.
shakiness The writer’s mother was 
diagnosed with Parkinson’s Disease, which 
is a nervous system disorder that causes 
trembling.
KEY POINT
‘Night’ blends elements of the 
autobiography and short story genres. 
It narrates events but the present 
reflection on those events.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
290
Some of the themes in this extract are:
 
◼
family relationships
 
◼
the impact of prolonged illness
 
◼
fear for one’s mental health
 
◼
reflecting on the past.
Look at the examples from the text that illustrate these themes in the following 
table. Match each example with one of the themes listed above and comment 
on their effect. 
▼  THEME
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  COMMENT
 
‘I must not even think of it but I did think 
of it.’
 
 
 
‘I knew now that he had not heard me 
getting up and walking around on just this 
one night.’
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘I don’t remember, at any rate having to 
tackle any of the jobs that piled up for 
me in later summers, when I fought quite 
willingly to maintain the decency of our 
house.’
 
 
 
 
‘so that I could spend part of the time 
wandering about like a visitor’
This shows that she was allowed to be 
freer than she would have otherwise 
been, because of her illness. It hints at the 
idleness that would have contributed to 
the narrator’s sense of unease.
The autobiographical and fictional elements of this short story are very cleverly 
intertwined, so it is difficult for the reader to judge where the autobiography 
ends and the storytelling begins. This is partly what makes the story both 
entertaining and effective. However, there are certain sections where the 
reader feels that one aspect is stronger than the other.
Two such extracts are given in the following table. Complete the table by adding 
more points to the ‘Explanation’ column. The first point has been done for you.
▼  ASPECT
▼  EXTRACT
▼  EXPLANATION
Fictional element is 
strong 
 
 
‘One night – I can’t say whether it could be the twentieth or the 
twelfth or only the eighth or the ninth that I had got up and walked 
– I got a sense, too late for me to change my pace, that there was 
somebody around the corner there was somebody waiting there and 
I could do nothing but walk right on’
Is important for plot development 
 
Strong sense of family history 
 
Autobiographical 
element is strong
‘I have thought that he was maybe in his better work clothes because 
he had a morning appointment to go to the bank, to learn, not to his 
surprise, that there was no extension to his loan. He had worked as 
hard as he could but the market was not going to turn around and he 
had to find a new way of supporting us as paying off what we owed 
at the same time. Or He may have found out that there was a name 
for my mother’s shakiness and that it was not going to stop. Or that 
he was in love with an impossible woman.’
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OR FICTION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
291
Munro uses a range of techniques to convey her themes and to build an 
effective narrative. Copy and complete the following table with examples for 
each technique, providing an explanation of its use. You may be able to find 
more techniques than the ones which have been listed, so if you do you should 
add them to the list.
▼  TECHNIQUE
▼  EXAMPLES
▼  COMMENT
Contrast 
 
 
 
1
2 
3
 
 
 
 
Repetition 
 
 
 
1 ‘Now I have to describe…’ 
2 
3
 
 
 
 
Conversational tone that 
communicates directly 
with the reader 
 
1
2
3
 
 
 
 
Descriptive detail 
 
 
2 
3
 
 
 
Short or incomplete 
sentences 
 
 
1 ‘Think again.’ 
2 
3
This highlights the 
narrator’s changing 
perceptions about herself. 
 
In fictional narratives, speech is used to convey character, break up the 
narration and move the plot forward. Speech in narratives can come in many 
forms. Usually, dialogue is written as direct or indirect speech. 
In direct speech we write the words as they were spoken between quotation 
marks. For example:
‘I felt very weak after the surgery,’ Elena said.
In indirect speech, what was said is reported by the narrative voice. For 
example:
‘Elena said that she felt weak after the surgery’.
EXPLORING LANGUAGE
NARRATIVE AND SPEECH
KEY POINT
A writer will have reasons for deciding 
to use either direct or indirect speech. 
What difference do you think it makes?
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
Although Night is a first person narrative that primarily focuses on the 
narrator’s thoughts and feelings, it uses speech as well. The text has 
both direct and indirect speech as well as direct speech written without 
quotation marks.
▼  DIRECT AND INDIRECT SPEECH
ACTIVITY 2
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
292
Exposition
Resolution
Climax
Rising action
Falling action
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
exposition a thorough description
 
▶ In groups, discuss the kind of advice you would give someone who is 
recovering from a long illness. Talk about different aspects such as 
taking care of their health, building up strength and stamina as well 
as ways to occupy their time.
▼  THINKING ABOUT ADVICE
ACTIVITY 2
SKILLS
COLLABORATION, EMPATHY, 
NEGOTIATION
Short stories have to have a tight structure in order to convey a complete story in 
relatively few words. This structure can be split into five different sections:
 
◼
exposition
 
◼
rising action
 
◼
climax
 
◼
falling action
 
◼
resolution.
The plot diagram below illustrates a common structural pattern. Fill in the 
boxes provided with an event or reference from the story that corresponds with 
the different stages of the plot of a short story.
Copy and complete the following table with examples of each type of 
speech and explain its use or effect.
▼  TYPE
▼  EXAMPLE
▼  EFFECT
Indirect speech 
 
 
 
 
 
Direct speech 
 
 
 
 
 
Direct speech without 
quotation marks
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
293
Use of powerful words and phrases
Description of night time wanderings
Referring to her mental 
state as ‘something
Short sentences and 
one-sentence paragraphs
The repetitive nature of the 
worry and the recurrence of 
sleeplessness
_____________________________
_____________________________
Fear and anxiety
How does the writer of ‘Night’ show the varied mental states of the narrator?
In your answer you should write about:
 
◼
the background and situation
 
◼
the first person narrator’s thoughts and feelings
 
◼
the use of language.
You should support your answer with close reference to the passage, including 
brief quotations. 
(30 marks)
EXAM-STYLE QUESTION
KEY POINT
Thought clouds are often useful in the 
initial stages of planning an answer. 
Once you see the ideas set out visually, 
you are often better able to order your 
thoughts.
AO1
AO2
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
Write a short story that begins with the words, ‘I had been alone 
for many days…’. Try to follow the structure of the short story in the 
diagram that you filled out.
WRITING TASKS
ACTIVITY 3
Look at the thought cloud that a candidate wrote whilst planning an 
answer to the question ‘How is the narrator’s fear and anxiety conveyed 
in “Night”?’ Complete the following spider diagram and number the 
points in the order in which you think they should appear in an answer. 
Find an example for each point and write a comment explaining why the 
example illustrates the point.
WRITING A SUCCESSFUL ANSWER
ACTIVITY 4
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
294
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how to follow your 
imagination in a way that will 
allow you to create a story for 
a reader to enjoy.
PLOT 
The plot consists of the main events of a story. You can develop a plot by 
listing the events that you think will take place in your story. These events, and 
the order in which they occur, may well change as you write and develop your 
characters and setting. 
Here are some key questions to ask yourself in relation to structure:
 
◼
How will you present your narrative?
 
◼
Will the end come at the end, or will you arrange things differently?
 
◼
What effect would you like to have on your reader?
 
◼
How do you think you could use structure to help you achieve the desired 
effect?
Works of crime fiction often follow a structure common to the genre. A crime is 
often detailed early on but the perpetrator is not revealed until the end. Whilst 
this is quite predictable, there are ways to utilise structure to challenge and 
surprise the reader.
There are many examples of stories that use unconventional or non-
chronological structures. For example, Emlyn William’s play, Night Must Fall, 
concerns the actions of a murderer. The opening scene takes place in a court 
where the murderer is convicted. In this scene, the audience learns the identity 
of one victim, but not that of the second. The next scene is set before the 
second murder, and the audience has to follow the character that they know to 
be the killer through scenes with other characters, wondering who his second 
victim will be. The effect would be very different if both victims’ identities were 
revealed in the opening scene.
You can source ideas from stories you have already heard or read, 
or from events about which you know something. You may know 
or imagine a character to use in your story, whose actions and 
feelings you can convey to your reader.
OVERVIEW OF IMAGINATIVE WRITING
Working in small groups, choose a story that you all know or that you 
have studied in school. Work together to list the main narrative points of 
the story.
ACTIVITY 1
▼  WORKING ON A PLOT
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, TEAMWORK
STRUCTURE
▲  Emlyn Williams’ Night Must Fall is a 
psychological thriller
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
295
How much do you need to know about your characters? How will this 
information be conveyed to the reader? Will you introduce the character 
upfront, so that the writer tells the reader a lot about this character early on in 
the narrative, or will the reader slowly get to know the character as the story 
unfolds?
NARRATION
Who is telling your story? Is it told by an all-knowing narrator who knows the 
characters’ thoughts, or is it told by one of the characters, whose knowledge 
and understanding of events is limited? Is it even narrated by someone 
unknown, who watches events without being involved
KEY POINT
With practice, you will develop a feel 
for imaginative writing. At first, you will 
have to consider the aspects of your 
writing separately, such as character, 
plot, structure and narration, but as 
you continue to practise you should 
find yourself considering these things 
automatically as you write. However, 
you should always remember to check 
what you have written.
Working in pairs, write two versions of the first three or four sentences 
of a story entitled ‘Runaway’. The first version should be told from the 
writer’s point of view, while the second version should be told from the 
point of view of the first character that you introduce.
Working on your own, write an introduction to a character at the start 
of a story entitled ‘Not yet my friend, not yet’. You must decide whether 
to reveal things about this character immediately and whether you want 
to hint at events that will happen later. Write no more than 100 words. 
When you have finished, exchange your piece with someone else. Read 
your partner’s character introduction, then write a continuation of the 
story and character development, following on from the first part that 
your partner has written
ACTIVITY 3
ACTIVITY 4
Choose a story that you know well. It could be a film, book, a short 
story or even a fairytale. 
How is the story structured? Do events run in chronological order or are 
they arranged differently?
Write down the key moments in the plot and try reorganising them into a 
different structure. What effect do you think this would have on the story 
and the reader’s experience?
ACTIVITY 2
▼  THINKING ABOUT STRUCTURE
▼  CHOOSING A NARRATOR
▼  WRITING CHARACTER
CHARACTER Revisit the activities 
on pages XXX–XXX
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, PROBLEM 
SOLVING, ADAPTIVE LEARNING
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
296
You may be asked to write in order to explore, to imagine or to entertain. 
Before you start trying to generate ideas, you should consider your purpose 
and what is expected.
 
◼
To explore. Think about a subject, considering its importance, especially 
if the question involves a particular reader or audience. What is important 
or significant about the subject? What do other people think about the 
subject? How do you react to thinking about it?
 
◼
To imagine. If you are asked to imagine something, the natural response 
is to write a narrative. We are all familiar with stories, whether imagined 
or real, and this makes telling a story a more comfortable option for many 
students in an examination. Remember that good story-telling requires the 
same planning and organising as any other kind of writing.
 
◼
To entertain. This requires similar skills to story-telling, with the difference 
being that, in order to entertain, your story will have to amuse the reader 
and hold their attention. You will not be able to claim that a story is funny; 
you will have to tell it in a way that makes your reader smile or laugh. 
Now you will need to consider possibilities, sources and other things with 
which you may be familiar or unfamiliar. It might help to ask yourself, ‘What 
if…?’ There may be characters from stories that you know or from real life that 
you could adapt and manipulate or change to suit your purpose. It can be fun 
to realise that, in fiction, you can make your characters do things that people 
might not do in real life.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
develop the confidence to  
consider ideas 
 
◼
plan ways of handling ideas
 
◼
present ideas appropriately.
In pairs, make a list of stories known to you that you could adapt 
for your own story-telling. Make a note of interesting characters and 
situations that might form the basis of a good story.
ACTIVITY 1
Any exercise or examination question that requires you to write 
imaginatively will give you some sort of starter even if it is 
simply a title. This is your starting point from which you will have 
to produce further ideas, develop them and turn them into an 
effective narrative that is written clearly and accurately.
GENERATING IDEAS 
GENERATING IDEAS FOR 
DIFFERENT PURPOSES
▼  ADAPTING STORIES AND CHARACTERS
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, CO-OPERATION
▲  There are many world famous characters in 
literature
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
297
Sharing initial thoughts and asking quick-fire questions of one another are 
techniques often used to help generate ideas. When people have to respond 
rapidly to questions, they are sometimes surprised how easily new ideas will 
appear. Sometimes there can be a chain reaction and a flood of unexpected 
ideas will result. The important thing is to engage with the exchange of ideas 
and opinions. Doing something different or unusual often triggers the discovery 
of new ideas.
KEY POINT
Consider the topic of your imaginative 
writing and plan carefully what 
you think you want to write before 
you start. However, once you have 
planned and started to write, do not 
be reluctant to change direction rather 
than continue with an idea that has lost 
its appeal.
In groups, try asking the question, ‘What if…?’ about people and 
situations with which you are familiar. Write down a list of key words 
that would provide you with the beginning of a story plan.
In pairs, make lists of the main features of four of the types of story 
listed above that are familiar to you. Then decide what you would want 
to include in the first paragraph of each type of story. Finally, working 
on your own write the four introductory paragraphs, one for each story 
type.
ACTIVITY 2
ACTIVITY 3
When you are required to write imaginatively, you may choose to use a familiar 
format, story elements or genre. For example, you could choose to write a 
fairytale, a horror story, a science fiction story about space travel, a historical 
novel set in a particular time period, a detective story or an adventure story.
▼  INTRODUCING DIFFERENT GENRES
▼  WHAT IF …?
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, TEAMWORK
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
298
Before you plot anything, you will need a clear sense of your purpose in 
writing. Even a simple sentence will guide you through the planning.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how to create a 
plot that suits your purpose in 
writing.
Working in pairs, list twelve stories that you know. They could be 
books, television programmes, films and so on. For each story, write 
one sentence to summarise the writer’s purpose. In each case, ask 
yourselves what you think the writer was trying to achieve. 
ACTIVITY 1
When you are planning your story’s plot, you should always 
consider the question: ‘What is happening, and why is it 
happening?
The importance of this question is that it makes you think about 
what you want to present in your narrative and how that helps 
your purpose. You might produce a wonderful dramatic passage, 
or a moving description but, unless these serve the purpose 
for which you are writing, you will not have been successful. 
Examiners notice this and will expect to find a sense of connected 
purpose as they read your work.
PLOT 
FIRST STEPS OF PLOTTING
▼  IDENTIFYING PURPOSE
Sometimes a writer will set out their reasons for writing a particular book. 
For example, Charles Dickens introduced the purpose of his first novel, The 
Pickwick Papers, with just one sentence:
The author’s object in this work was to place before the reader a constant 
succession of characters and incidents; to paint them in as vivid colours as he 
could command; and to render them, at the same time, life-like and amusing.
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING,  
INTERPRETATION
▶
KEY POINT 
The plot is a key step in planning 
imaginative writing. Once it has been 
established, you can start to apply 
details, remembering that further 
ideas may come to you as you plan 
and write, and that you should be 
ready to respond to these ideas. Ideas 
can come from thinking about and 
developing the events and characters 
in your plan, so make use of these 
ideas where possible.
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, TEAMWORK
1 In pairs, follow Dickens’s idea for a succession of characters and 
amusing incidents by listing people you know. For each of these 
people, try to imagine an amusing incident in which they might easily 
become involved. Make brief notes on the incident.
2 Still working in pairs, list the really important events that you want to 
include in your narrative, then write one sentence for each of these 
points, saying why they are important for readers following your story.
▼  DEVELOPING PLOT
ACTIVITY 2
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
299
Once you have established a clear sense of purpose around your writing, you 
can start to develop your plot further. Utilising the simple sentences and initial 
ideas you have around your plot, you can start to expand these to create a 
fuller image of the narrative you wish to tell. 
There are many ways in which you can develop ideas.
 
◼
Using a photo or an image, try applying your idea to the subject matter or 
situation shown. This can help you generate a chain of events, setting or 
story
 
◼
Consider an alternative perspective from different characters to offer a 
differing view or approach to your idea
 
◼
Establish a start, middle and end of your story. Once these key 
components have been created, use your ideas to connect them together 
and develop them further.
 
◼
Consider the type of plot you wish to use. Many writers experiment with 
time, perspective or twists to keep the reader engaged. 
DEVELOPING PLOT
 
◼
Using your list of plot points from Activity 2, impose the following 
techniques and note how this changes the plot.
 
◼
Different narrative perspective
 
◼
Presenting the plot in different order
 
◼
Add a shocking twist at the end
ADAPTING PLOTS
ACTIVITY 3
▲  What ideas for a plot does this photo give you?
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
300
Beginnings and endings provide the support for the rest of the narrative in 
much the same way as two book-ends hold up a row of books. They are both 
important. The introduction sets the narrative in motion and establishes the 
tone or mood of the piece: is it relaxed or tense, detailed or in a hurry to move 
on? The conclusion provides the author’s final word. Is it a happy one? Is the 
writer anxious to finish? Is the fate of major characters something that the 
writer is pleased with? Would the writer want to return to this topic, or to this 
character?
Look at the opening of Graham Greene’s Brighton Rock:
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how to order 
important items in a narrative 
and link them in the most 
effective way.
The structure of a piece of writing involves both the order and 
the manner in which components of a narrative are assembled. 
Ordering the components is one thing, but deciding how they will 
fit together within the story is another. Each of the components 
will have to fit somehow with the component that precedes 
it and the component that follows. For example, will any two 
components be closely linked so that we move quickly from 
a physical description of a character to an explanation of that 
character’s history or an account of some of the things done by 
that character?
These are the kinds of decisions that you will have to make as 
you plan and write.
STRUCTURE
Hale knew they meant to murder him before he had been in Brighton 
three hours. With his inky fingers and his bitten nails, his manner cynical 
and nervous, anybody could tell he didn’t belong – belong to the early 
summer sun, the cool Whitsun wind off the sea, the holiday crowd.
BEGINNINGS AND ENDINGS
Whitsun A date in the Christian calendar, 
seven weeks after Easter.
▲  A scene from the film adaptation of Graham Greene’s Brighton Rock
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
301
This is the opening of a psychological drama where a desperate man, all alone, 
is filled with the terror of knowing that someone wants to murder him. This is 
the first, shocking thing that we are told about him. Immediately, Greene goes 
on to describe him in way that confirms what he has just told us: that this man 
no longer belongs to life (that is, to the sun, the wind or the crowds of holiday-
makers).
Now look at the end of an equally famous novel. In Lord of the Flies, William 
Golding tells the story of a group of schoolboys who find themselves alone on 
a tropical island where, without adult supervision, their behaviour deteriorates 
into brutal savagery. Two of the boys die as a result of this. At the end, there is 
a rescue.
…And in the middle of them, with filthy body, matted hair, and unwiped 
nose, Ralph wept for the end of innocence, the darkness of man’s heart and 
the fall through the air of the true, wise friend called Piggy.
The officer, surrounded by these noises, was moved and a little embarrassed. 
He turned away to give them time to pull themselves together; and waited, 
allowing his eyes to rest on the trim cruiser in the distance.
In this conclusion, it is clear that Ralph has been traumatised by events on the 
island and the naval officer is unsure what to make of the boys. Here there is a 
powerful contrast between the boys’ loss of civilised standards and the officer 
who, with his ‘trim’ warship represents the civilisation that the boys have lost, 
and who cannot understand what has happened to them. Golding’s choice to 
link the wild-looking boy and the officer on duty in this final scene makes this 
contrast all the more powerful.
The ordering here, of Ralph’s memories at the end of the boys’ adventure, 
followed by the officer’s failure to understand what the boys have endured, 
shows how far they went beyond normal behaviour and is emphasised here in 
this short, final paragraph.
KEY POINT 
Try to structure your sentences, 
paragraphs and whole narratives while 
bearing in mind the likely responses of 
your readers as you link the points that 
you make.
In pairs, create a list of points that make up the plot of a story. Write 
the opening sentences of this story, so that a character and his or her 
situation are introduced quickly and suddenly, so that the reader will 
be shocked. Now write a second opening to the same story. This time, 
link the two ideas more slowly, to give your reader more time to fully 
understand events. How does this change in structure affect the impact 
on the reader?
ACTIVITY 1
▼  IDENTIFYING PURPOSE
cruiser A warship.
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
302
Non-fiction writing involves a greater level of sharing the writer’s purposes in 
writing, such as to inform someone who needs to know something or to discuss 
a topic in which the reader is interested. A fictional narrative begins with the idea 
of entertaining someone who can choose to stop reading if they are not enjoying 
the experience of reading. The narrator has to present something that will trigger a 
reader’s interest and satisfaction. 
Kenneth Grahame’s The Wind in the Willows was written for children a hundred 
years ago. Read the following extract from the beginning of the story, paying 
attention to the way in which Grahame seeks to engage the reader. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
develop the skill of drawing 
the reader into the narrative so 
that they will appreciate being 
entertained.
A narrative has to lead the reader. If the reader does not like the 
narrative, it is very easy for them to stop reading. 
NARRATION
In small groups, list the ways in which Grahame begins this narrative. 
These could include things such as the image of someone hard at 
work, the details of Mole’s equipment, and so on. For each of these 
techniques used by Grahame to engage the reader’s interest, explain in 
one sentence how you react to them.
ACTIVITY 1
▼  ENGAGING THE READER’S INTEREST
SKILLS
CRITICAL ANALYSIS, ANALYSIS, 
INTERPRETATION
In pairs, make a list of stories that you have enjoyed. They do not 
necessarily have to be stories from books or films. They could be stories 
that you have simply heard from other people. For each story, write 
down one sentence explaining how the story begins. Note whether the 
story starts by focusing on a character, by describing something like the 
setting, or by presenting some action. You may discover way of starting 
a story that is new to you, so be prepared to learn new techniques.
ACTIVITY 2 
▼  BEGINNING A STORY
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, TEAMWORK
▲  “The Mole had been working very hard all 
morning”
▶
The Mole had been working very hard all the morning, spring-cleaning 
his little home. First with brooms, then with dusters; then on ladders with 
steps and chairs, with a brush and a pail of whitewash; till he had dust all 
over his black fur, and an aching back and weary arms. Spring was moving 
in the air above and in the earth below and around him, penetrating even 
his dark and lowly little house with its spirit of divine discontent and 
longing. It was small wonder, then, that he suddenly flung down his brush 
on the floor, said, ‘Bother!’ and, ‘O blow!, and also, ‘Hang spring-cleaning!’ 
and bolted out of the house without even waiting to put on his coat. 
▼  FROM THE WIND IN THE WILLOWS BY KENNETH GRAHAME
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.
