PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
303
The three paragraphs that follow are written in the first person. First person 
narratives provide a sense of immediacy as we listen to someone who was 
there and saw for themselves what actually happened and what was actually 
said.
I first began to take notice of the family when I ran into the mother on the 
way to the shops. She smiled and reached out her arm to touch my shoulder 
then allowed her hand to rest for a moment on the lapel of my jacket.
‘Will you thank your wife for me?’ Over her shoulder I could see the two 
little ones. Margaret had taken them in when their cat had been run over and 
looked after them until their mother had returned from the vets.
‘That’s OK,’ I said. ‘They were no trouble.’ I nodded towards her children 
who were about to catch her up. ‘We enjoyed looking after them.’
The next three paragraphs are written in the third person and are more 
detached, as if the writer is observing from a distance rather than being 
involved. This can give the impression that the writer is giving a more balanced 
or reliable view of things, and is not affected by the things that he or she writes 
about.
There had been rumours about the disused mine for years. Tom and his friend 
had played around the entrance when they were small, but, understandably, 
when their parents had found out a fuss had been made and the owners were 
obliged to seal it up.
Still the rumours had continued. As the boys grew older, and their circle of 
friendship had widened, they had encountered other boys from further afield 
who had also heard the rumours. At school and at home there had been hand 
tools that they had learnt to use, hammers, chisels, crow-bars and spades. At 
school there had been adventure stories about children their own age.
They met one morning at what had been the mine entrance, carrying tools 
borrowed from garden sheds and garages, tools belonging to parents who 
would not have agreed to lend them for this particular purpose.
What difference do you think could be made by choosing one of these two 
narrative styles? How might the impact on the reader change, depending on 
whether the story is narrated in the first or third person?
FIRST AND THIRD PERSON 
NARRATIVES
KEY POINT 
Remember that, as the writer of a 
narrative, you will have to decide the 
character of the narrator. Is it you, a 
character in the story, or someone who 
is detached from the story and treats 
events like a newspaper reporter?
In pairs or on your own, write a different version of each of the two 
narratives that you have just read. For the first narrative, which is 
currently written in the first person, use the third person. You could start 
with the words, ‘He first began to…’ For the second narrative, use the 
first person, writing perhaps from the point of view of one of the boys 
involved or one of their parents. 
ACTIVITY 3
▼  CHOOSING BETWEEN FIRST AND THIRD PERSON
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
304
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
think about how to create and 
use characters in your writing.
Characters influence readers in several ways: through our direct 
awareness of what they think, do and say; through their influence 
on other characters; and through what the author tells us about 
them.
CHARACTERS 
In pairs, read the following excerpts from pieces of imaginative writing and 
identify how you learn about each of the characters. Do you learn about 
them through their own thoughts and actions, through the narrator’s 
descriptions and judgements, or through another character’s eyes?
 
◾ He thought she was stunning. You could tell when he spoke about 
her and when he waited after school, when most of us boys had set 
off for the park. You could tell when we asked him about her. Most 
telling was the cruel moment when someone said that she had been 
running after one of the boys in the other class.
 
◾ I noticed them gradually, as they crawled out of the rotten 
woodwork onto the paving slabs. What use they were I could never 
tell and so, before they could reach the dog’s bowl, I lifted my foot 
and ground them into the concrete. Mary wouldn’t have liked it but 
then she was not there to see what I had done.
 
◾ He was the biggest rabbit in the litter. Since they had arrived in the 
straw, under the lamp, he had quickly learnt to barge his brothers 
and sisters to one side so that he always got the best feed. Now that 
they were weaned the others simply moved aside when he wanted a 
drink or the best spot in the warm straw bed. 
ACTIVITY 1
Characters are not just the people in a story. One of them may be the narrator 
of the story. They may be the people in the story about whom we learn from the 
author, in a third person narrative. A character may never actually appear in a 
story, but they may still be of importance and we may learn about them from the 
narrator or from other characters.
▼  LEARNING ABOUT CHARACTERS
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
◀  “He was the biggest rabbit in 
the litter”
▶
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
305
An author has to decide whether characters should be revealed by someone 
else such as the narrator, who passes on what they know or feel about them, 
or by the characters themselves so that readers can see the characters in 
action and make up their own minds about them. 
Sometimes the reader needs to know something about a character that the 
character would be reluctant to reveal themselves. Then the author, or another 
character, might need to tell the reader.
She was far too modest to tell anyone about her bravery, how she had forced 
her way into the burning house to rescue her neighbours’ children. When she 
forgets to put on her gloves you can see the scars still.
Sometimes the reader is better convinced when they can see an event for 
themselves, rather than being told about it.
She put down the phone and rushed outside. She looked over to the other 
neighbours’ houses but there were no lights to be seen. Somehow she found 
the strength to force open the door and make her way in. Moments later she 
emerged with a small child whom she laid carefully on the grass, away from 
the house. By now a red glow showed itself from all the upstairs windows 
and smoke was streaming from the door. From some distance away came the 
sound of a siren. The girl paused, took a deep breath and turned back into 
the smoke.
KEY POINT 
You learn about characters by what 
they say and do, by the reactions of 
other characters and by what you are 
told by the author.
Try answering the following questions about each of the characters in 
Activity 1
 
◼
Who are they?
 
◼
What are they?
 
◼
What are they doing?
 
◼
What are they trying to achieve?
 
◼
How do they interact with each other?
ACTIVITY 2
▼  QUESTIONS TO ASK ABOUT CHARACTERS
Working on your own, write an opening section for a story containing 
introductions to two characters. One character should be introduced by 
the narrator or another character, whereas the second character should 
introduce themselves.
ACTIVITY 3
▼  INTRODUCING CHARACTERS
REVEALING CHARACTER
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
306
The following extracts are taken from Susan Hill’s novel, I’m the King of the 
Castle. When Edmund Hooper is about eleven, his father tells him that another 
boy is coming to live in their house, along with his mother who is to be their 
housekeeper. Edmund’s mother had died a few years before. The story 
continues.
Hooper began to mould plasticine between his hands, for another layer to the 
geological model, standing as a board beside the window. He thought of the 
boy called Kingshaw, who was coming.
‘It is my house,’ he thought, ‘it is private, I got here first. Nobody should 
come here.’
Hooper’s words here form a monologue. They are private words, whether 
spoken or thought. Through them Hooper reveals his determination that no 
one should share the house with him. No one else can know about these 
thoughts and the author has given the reader a private view, as it were, into the 
boy’s jealous determination.
Soon the boys are left together.
He walked round the table, towards the window. Kingshaw stepped back as 
he came.
‘Scaredy!’
‘No.’
‘When my father dies,’ Hooper said, ‘this house will belong to me. I shall be 
master. It’ll all be mine.’
‘That’s nothing. It’s only an old house.’
Here the story moves on with a dialogue, and we can see the very beginning 
of the bullying and rivalry that will result in a death. This failure of the boys to 
cooperate can easily be presented in a natural situation such as this one, more 
so than using someone’s private thoughts.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
use speech to reveal character.
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
monologue speech or thoughts of 
someone alone
dialogue two or more persons involved in a 
conversation
Monologues represent the thoughts or speech of a single person 
or character, whereas dialogues are exchanges between more 
than one person or character. These serve different purposes 
in imaginative writing: monologues can be more fluid, like our 
thoughts, whereas dialogues can portray arguments, or love or 
perhaps progress towards a resolution of some question.
MONOLOGUES AND DIALOGUES
▶
▲  Monologues can be used to create the complexity of individual character
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
307
Speech and private thoughts provide a writer with useful tools for introducing 
characters. What people say and think when they are alone, or think that they 
are alone, can be very revealing about their character. Satirical magazines such 
as Private Eye make good use of this technique. One early novel in the English 
language, Pamela by Samuel Richardson, uses thoughts from a private diary to 
reveal important information.
KEY POINT 
You are affected by what people say. In 
your writing help your reader to sense 
what it is about their words that affects 
you. 
In pairs, briefly introduce four characters using monologues. Your 
characters will find themselves:
 
◼
alone at night, unable to sleep 
 
◼
in a crowd 
 
◼
with someone who refuses to speak to them
 
◼
in a situation of your own choice.
ACTIVITY 1
In pairs or on your own, use a character’s private thoughts or words that 
have been overheard to introduce one or more of the characters. Try 
not to tell your reader what you think of your character or characters. 
Instead, try to show them for what they are, using their words. You 
could use the following words as a starting point.
They couldn’t believe their luck. There, on the table in front of them, was 
the diary. It had been left open and there on the first pages were some 
of the words they had hoped to find.
ACTIVITY 3
▼  USING PRIVATE THOUGHTS
In pairs, briefly introduce four characters or groups of characters 
through dialogue. Your characters will find themselves in the following 
situations.
 
◼
A home owner confronting a stranger in his or her back garden.
 
◼
A group of friends trying to persuade a bouncer or security guard to 
let them into a night club.
 
◼
A group of magistrates questioning someone who is on trial or who 
is giving evidence.
 
◼
A teacher asking a student why their homework has not been done.
ACTIVITY 2
▼  USING DIALOGUE
▼  USING MONOLOGUES
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION, TEAMWORK
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION, TEAMWORK
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
308
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
use your senses to guide your 
descriptive writing.
USING THE SENSES 
It is through our five senses that we know the world around us. The more 
that we can engage our senses, and those of a reader, the more effective our 
writing will be.
Were you woken by an alarm clock or by the sound of a parent’s voice this 
morning? Was the first thing that you saw a bright light shining in your face? 
Was the first thing you felt someone pulling back the blankets? Did you smell 
toast? Was the first thing you tasted toothpaste, some fruit juice or a boiled 
egg?
Descriptions can be written for their own sake, or to accompany 
narratives, instructions, explanations and argument. They rely on 
an engagement of our senses and our imaginations.
DESCRIPTIVE WRITING 
Working on your own, try to remember and list the first things that you 
heard, saw, felt, smelt and tasted after waking up this morning. Use this 
list as the basis of a description of your first half hour of the day. 
ACTIVITY 1
In pairs, consider which of these pairs of sentences you find more 
convincing:
1 A:  He removed his coat from a hook behind the door.
B:  He lifted one arm and eased his coat from the hook behind the 
door.
2 A:  On the horizon a car appeared.
B:  From the horizon something hurried towards them along the road.
3 A:  They heard the squeal of angry brakes and were thrown forward 
against the opposite seats.
B:  The driver applied the brakes suddenly.
4 A:  The engine died.
B:  For no reason he could think of, the engine stopped.
ACTIVITY 2
Sometimes, we can describe things more convincingly by ‘showing’ the reader 
rather than telling them.
▼  SHOWING OR TELLING?
▼  USING YOUR SENSES
SHOW, NOT TELL
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, COLLABORATION
SKILLS
CREATIVITY
▶
▲  Are your senses acute or dull in the morning?
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
309
KEY POINT 
An imaginative choice of words can 
enhance a description. For example, 
what is the difference in effect 
between ‘the cat sat on the mat’ and 
‘the cat sprawled on the mat’?
In pairs, list the verbs and verbal adjectives that help to convey the 
descriptive elements in the extract from The War of the Worlds. There 
are twenty. Then list the seventeen ordinary adjectives that Wells uses.
Then, use the lists that you compiled in response to Activity 4 in order 
to write your own description of ‘The Thing’.
ACTIVITY 4
The Thing itself lay almost entirely buried in sand, amidst the scattered 
splinters of a fir tree it had shivered to fragments in its descent. 
The uncovered part had the appearance of a huge cylinder, caked over 
and its outline softened by a thick scaly dun-coloured incrustation. It had 
a diameter of about thirty metres. He approached the mass, surprised at 
the size and more so at the shape, since most meteorites are rounded more 
or less completely. It was, however, still so hot from its flight through the 
air as to forbid his near approach. A stirring noise with its cylinder he 
ascribed to the unequal cooling of its surface; for at that time it had not 
occurred to him that it might be hollow.
Suddenly he noticed with a start that some of the grey clinker, the ashy 
incrustation that covered the meteorite, was falling off the circular edge of 
the end. It was dropping off in flakes and raining down upon the sand. A 
large piece suddenly came off and fell with a sharp noise that brought his 
heart into his mouth.
And then he perceived that, very slowly, the circular top of the cylinder 
was rotating on its body. It was such a gradual movement that he 
discovered it only through noticing that a black mark that had been near 
him five minutes ago was now at the other side of the circumference. 
Even then he scarcely understood what this indicated, until he heard a 
muffled grating sound and saw the black mark jerk forward an inch or 
so. Then the thing came upon him in a flash. The cylinder was an artificial 
hollow with an end that screwed out! Something within the cylinder was 
unscrewing the top! 
▼  FROM THE WAR OF THE WORLDS BY H.G. WELLS
▼  IDENTIFYING DESCRIPTION
SKILLS
ANALYSIS,  ADAPTIVE LEARNING, 
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
In pairs, identify the words and phrases that are used to create effective 
description in the following passage adapted from The War of the 
Worlds. In H.G. Wells’s story of an invasion by creatures from Mars, 
there is a description of one their spaceships that serves to enhance the 
drama of its discovery. When the novel was dramatised and broadcast 
like live news on American radio, it caused widespread panic as 
listeners thought they were listening to a news bulletin. 
ACTIVITY 3
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, ANALYSIS
CREATING EFFECT
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
310
This sense of ‘the right word’ is a strong one and, just as we can realise 
this when we are writing, or speaking, so we appreciate it when we listen to 
someone else or read what they have to say.
Read the two versions of the same account that follows.
VERSION A
Before a visit to the dentist when I was about fourteen, I liked ice cream. 
Then I had a tooth removed, under a general anaesthetic. 
Soon I was dreaming that I was eating an ice cream. The ice cream tasted of 
tomatoes. I had never liked tomatoes. For six months afterwards I didn’t fancy 
ice cream until I made myself buy one and found that it tasted all right. 
VERSION B
Before a visit to the dentist when I was about fourteen, I was unable to resist 
ice cream. Then I had a tooth removed, under a general anaesthetic. 
Soon I was dreaming that I was eating an ice cream. Unfortunately the ice 
cream tasted of fried tomatoes and, worse still, smelled of fried tomatoes. I 
had never liked tomatoes, in fact I loathed them. For six months afterwards I 
was unable to face ice cream until I forced myself to buy one and discovered, 
much to my relief, that it tasted of ice cream. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
choose appropriate words 
 
◼
feel empowered to make 
good choices when selecting 
vocabulary for effect
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
mots justes a French phrase, meaning 
words that are apt, or just right
Sometimes we say that we are ‘trying to find the right word’. 
Sometimes it is not until we stumble across the right word, by 
chance perhaps, that we realise that we have found it.
VOCABULARY FOR EFFECT 
In pairs, list the words that 
have been changed between 
Extract A and Extract B, 
starting with liked (in extract 
1) and was unable to resist 
(in Extract B). Then, for each 
change, write one sentence 
explaining the effect of the 
change. 
ACTIVITY 1
Working on your own, describe 
in one paragraph something 
that has surprised you. It could 
be a particular sight or scene 
or an event that you have 
witnessed. Try to use some 
mots justes. Exchange your 
description with someone 
else and try to identify your 
partner’s mots justes.
CREATING IMAGES 
Writers often use images, or things that can be seen or visualised, as 
reminders of concepts or events, as a narrative progresses. In this way, 
associations between things allow the writer to provide quick links or 
reminders for the reader which nevertheless do not impede the story. 
CHOOSING THE RIGHT WORD
ACTIVITY 2
▼   THE EFFECTS OF 
DIFFERENT WORDS
▼   CHOOSING THE PERFECT 
WORD
SKILLS
INNOVATION
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
▶
▲  “The ice cream tasted of tomatoes”
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
311
They were not used to lighting their own bonfires, but one of them had 
smuggled a box of matches out of the house. They had never been shown the 
elementary precautions that anyone should take before lighting a fire. Despite 
this they enjoyed seeing the flames leap, from the first match to the paper 
stuffed under the brush wood, then flare up through the heavier branches 
until the flames roared skywards over the wood and waste material that had 
been piled high.
When a stiff breeze suddenly blew amongst them they watched horrified 
as the flames licked across to the garden shed which held their toys. Within 
minutes the roof was a blanket of flame and the toys had gone for ever.
Consider the following instructions or comments: 
 
◼
‘Keep an eye on him.’
 
◼
‘Your homework is dreadful.’
How do you think you would respond to these instructions or statements? Do 
you think you would respond differently if they were rephrased as follows?
 
◼
‘Just try to keep an eye on him.’
 
◼
‘Your homework is rather disappointing.’
In the second list, the writer is trying to reduce or soften the impact of their 
words. The first instruction becomes a suggestion, a hint that perhaps you 
should keep an eye on someone. The second instruction becomes a hint that 
you might be pleased to have tried something. Finally, the comment that your 
homework is not good is amended so that, rather than sounding angry, the 
teacher is trying to make you feel regret for letting them down.
HINTING, SUGGESTING, 
UNDERSTATING 
KEY POINT 
You readily use subtle forms of words 
when you speak to other people. With a 
little thought you can be just as flexible 
when writing.
Here it is a box of matches that becomes an image of danger, of fear, a 
reminder in Clare’s adult life of something that can go badly wrong and cause 
danger and destruction. 
Working on your own, choose one of the following objects and write a 
paragraph in which you turn it into an image of something important:
 
◼
a pen
 
◼
a pair of shoes
 
◼
a scarf
 
◼
a memory stick.
 
◼
a football
ACTIVITY 3
Working on your own, extend each of the six instructions or comments that you have just read so that they make 
it clear what is going on. You could follow the pattern of the following example sentence in order to do so.
‘I don’t think this is going to work; the glue has already set’.
Try to use subtle words and phrases to do so, so that you suggest what is going on rather than stating it.
ACTIVITY 4
▼  USING IMAGES TO CONVEY MEANING
▼  USING SUBTLE LANGUAGE
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
SKILLS
ADAPTIVE LEARNING, CREATIVITY, 
INNOVATION
Read the following piece of imaginative writing.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
312
In her novel, The Risk of Darkness, Susan Hill describes a young woman priest 
walking home. At the time of the novel’s setting, the sight of a woman priest 
was a novelty in England. A dog collar is a popular description of the white 
collar that many clergy wear across the throat. Doing a wheelie involves riding 
a bike while balancing on the rear wheel. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
create effects in imaginative 
writing through the way in 
which sentences are organised.
SENTENCE TYPES 
Sentences have various ways of being organised: short, 
compound or complex. All these types produce different effects. 
SENTENCES FOR EFFECT 
A boy bounced past her on a bicycle doing wheelies over the cobbles. Jane 
smiled at him. He did not respond but when he had gone by, turned and 
stared over his shoulder. She was used to it. Here she was, a girl, wearing 
jeans, and a dog collar. People were still surprised.
The first sentence is a simple one containing only one main verb. It is also 
quite loose, as the main verb is found at the start of the sentence. This 
sentence could be stopped after just five words and it would still make sense. 
What do you think is achieved by including the rest of the sentence?
We have worked on just the first sentence in the paragraph from The Risk 
of Darkness. The third and fifth sentences grow in a similar way to the first 
sentence, but what about the other sentences? They are all simple, periodic 
sentences, but are related to the more complicated sentences that they follow. 
Look again at the third sentence:
He did not respond but when he had gone by, turned and stared over his 
shoulder. 
Here there is much detail added to the basic sentence and the boy’s reaction 
to Jane is made clear. Her reaction is conveyed in only five words:
She was used to it.
doing wheelies Balancing a bicycle on its 
rear wheel while riding it.
dog collar An informal description of the 
white collar worn by the clergy of some 
Christian churches.
 
▶ In pairs, find the other two places in the extract where a sentence could 
be stopped early. What effect does the writer achieve by building up the 
sentence in this way?
Decide how you could develop the following sentences. Write down the 
purpose for extending each one, then add to it.
 
◼
The door opened.
 
◼
They could see the dog.
 
◼
The streets were always the same. 
What sort of sentences have you produced? Are they loose, periodic or 
balanced? Are they simple, compound or complex?
ACTIVITY 1
▼  DEVELOPING SENTENCES
SKILLS
ANALYSIS, CREATIVITY
▶
▲  A mountain biker demonstrating a wheelie
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
313
OTHER WAYS OF ORGANISING 
SENTENCES 
We have seen the way in which strong effects can be created when sentences 
of different types are carefully placed together. Now we are going to look at 
other ways of organising sentences. Read the following piece of imaginative 
writing.
KEY POINT 
While you are writing, be prepared 
to stop occasionally and ask yourself 
whether the words you have written 
will achieve your purpose or purposes.
In pairs or in groups, try to develop an idea using different patterns of 
sentences, investigating what might serve your purposes and focusing 
on what you were aiming to achieve at the outset.
Remember, deciding your purpose is something that you have to do 
before you start to write, you must bear it in mind while you are writing. 
Working alone, decide on an idea that you would like to develop in one 
paragraph. Write down that idea in one sentence and then start. If you 
are writing on paper use only every third line to give yourself room to 
try out words and make improvements to what you have written as you 
make progress. Your paragraph should be a minimum of four sentences.
In pairs, decide what effect Jane achieves by revealing her reaction in 
this simple sentence without further detail. What effect is achieved in 
the sixth sentence?
ACTIVITY 4
ACTIVITY 3
ACTIVITY 2
It was icy, bitter cold. The washing hung frozen on the lines and icicles 
reached down from gutters that were filled with water that could no longer 
flow, held in place by unbelievable low temperatures. He looked for his 
gloves. He had left them to one side, by the door, but the space on the shelf 
was empty now and only the marks which he had brushed in the dust 
remained to remind him that his memory was not playing tricks.
Instead of showing a reaction to something, as with the short sentences in 
Hill’s paragraph from The Risk of Darkness, these long, complex sentences 
develop the ideas in the short sentences that they follow. Of course, the pairs 
of sentences here also develop a wider idea – the drama of this character and 
the bitter cold he faced.
▼  THE EFFECT OF DIFFERENT SENTENCE TYPES
▼  DEVELOPING AN IDEA USING SENTENCE TYPES
▼  USING DIFFERENT SENTENCE PATTERNS
SKILLS
ANALYSIS
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION
SKILLS
CREATIVITY, INNOVATION,  
COLLABORATION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
314
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
take greater control over your 
writing
 
◼
think about the use of the 
senses when writing
 
◼
make clear what you want to 
say about characters, actions 
and locations.
SAMPLE QUESTON AND ANSWER
The following is a sample examination question with a sample response and a 
commentary to follow.
 
▶ Write about a time when you, or someone you know, had an unexpected 
experience. Your response could be real or imagined.
It was a warm summer’s day and we set off from the farmyard to round up some 
sheep. Early in the summer all the sheep were rounded up so that they could 
be dipped, pushed one at a time through a long narrow bath that contained an 
insecticide that would protect them from flies that would burrow into their flesh and 
lay their eggs in the wounds that they had created. The condition is called fly-strike.
The sheep we were looking for had spread themselves over the moor and across 
to an open area of land between the road and the sea. With us we had two sheep 
dogs. Once we had crossed the road we sent the dogs round in wide sweeping 
paths to move the sheep together into a flock that we could move across the 
road and back to the farm.
Ahead of us we could see the dogs, their heads up as they looked from side to side 
for sheep that were standing still as if wondering whether to move or not. They 
moved on, and left us to follow, pushing the flock up towards the road. Then, as the 
ground sloped more steeply away beneath our feet, we could see them no longer. 
Below us, to our left, we could hear the sea crashing into the rocks at the foot of 
the cliffs. Suddenly, from ahead of us, came the blare of a fog horn.
We hadn’t noticed the clouds that had come up behind us. They had yet to blot 
out the sun and we were more aware of the growing flock to our right that was 
moving slowly towards the road. Ahead of us the dogs were barking furiously 
now and we stepped forwards to see what was troubling them. Again the fog 
horn blared, this time almost above us.
Suddenly, the fog had surrounded us; damp and chill, it had been blown up behind 
us as the breeze had lifted. We could see nothing of dogs or sheep, but we could 
hear them and the rocks that were directly below us. To one side we leant on the 
round wall of the tower that housed the fog horn, built into the cliff. Around us 
sheep and dogs continued to move carefully, but we two-legged creatures were far 
less stable on the cliff face and so we waited until the breeze dropped and the fog 
slid away off the cliff and moved slowly, back down to the water.
Remember that, in the exam, you will need to demonstrate the 
following points in your imaginative writing.
 
◼ Ideas that are communicated effectively and imaginatively. 
This is what you will have to plan.
 
◼ Writing that is clear and accurate. This is what you will have 
to check.
PUTTING IT INTO PRACTICE 
SAMPLE QUESTIONS 
▶
(30 marks)
AO4
AO5
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, 
ANALYSIS, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
315
This is an explanation of how this sample answer was written. Try following this 
process in your own imaginative writing.
PLANNING THE PLOT 
The planning of this piece is focused on the fog surrounding the two 
characters who were caught unawares. The rounding up of the sheep provides 
a context, a background or explanation as to why the characters were on the 
sloping cliffs where fog was more of a danger, a sense of drama that could be 
used to a lesser or greater extent by the writer. 
As the gathering of the sheep proceeds, the task becomes a distraction for 
the characters as they watch the sheep, rather than the weather behind them. 
As the drama develops we can feel the slope of the cliffs, the dogs disappear 
from sight, somewhere ahead, then we hear the waves and the sudden burst 
of the fog horn. The reader’s senses provide a link to the drama. 
CHECKING 
This is where you must read the passage aloud or, under exam conditions, 
imagine the sound of a voice reading it aloud. This is the most effective way of 
checking your writing. If the punctuation is poor, you will find yourself unable 
to read the passage fluently, and if there are lapses in the grammar then the 
sense of the writing will not be clear. If this happens, ask yourself, ‘What is the 
subject of this sentence?’ and ‘What are we told about the subject?’. These 
questions should help you to clarify the sentence. 
 
▶ Write a story with the title, ‘Left Behind’. Your response could be real or 
imagined.  
(30 marks)
Allow yourself 45 minutes to respond to this question with a piece that is  
300–400 words in length.
Exchange your finished piece with a partner, then read each other’s work and 
exchange comments. Try to suggest ways of improving each other’s work 
rather than simply finding faults. 
KEY POINT 
Engaging your audience is crucial. 
Remember that good imaginative 
writing usually involves something that 
the author wants to say. If the author 
wants something to be read, the reader 
must be given a reason to start and 
encouragement to keep reading.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS 
SKILLS
CRITICAL THINKING, 
ANALYSIS, ADAPTIVE 
LEARNING, CREATIVITY
▲  The reader’s senses provide a link to the drama
AO4
AO5
COMMENTARY
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

READING SKILLS
USE OF LANGUAGE
317
PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
317
PAPER 3: POETRY AND 
PROSE TEXTS AND 
IMAGINATIVE WRITING
PAPER 3
317
Assessment Objective 1
Read and understand a 
variety of texts, selecting and 
interpreting information, ideas 
and perspectives
Assessment Objective 2
Understand and analyse how 
writers use linguistic and 
structural devices to achieve 
their effects
Assessment Objective 4
Communicate effectively and 
imaginatively, adapting form, 
tone and register of writing 
for specific purposes and 
audiences
Assessment Objective 5 
Write clearly, using a range 
of vocabulary and sentence 
structures, with appropriate 
paragraphing and accurate 
spelling, grammar and 
punctuation
In Paper 3, the assessment 
objectives are worth the 
following amounts:
AO1 – 8%
AO2 – 12%
AO4 – 12%
AO5 – 8%
This chapter focuses on Paper 3: Poetry and Prose Texts 
and Imaginative Writing of the English Language A course. 
Working through these lessons and activities will help you 
develop the reading and writing skills that you will need for 
the Paper 3 coursework.
Paper 3 is worth 40% of the total marks for the course and is 
split into two sections:
◼	Assignment A: Poetry and prose texts
◼	Assignment B: Imaginative writing.
In assignment A of your coursework, you will need to be able 
to meet assessment objectives AO1 and AO2.
In assignment B of your coursework, you will need to be able to meet Assessment Objectives 
AO4 and AO5.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
318
PAPER 3
COURSEWORK OVERVIEW
318
COURSEWORK TASKS FOR PAPER 3 
Assignment A 
Poetry and prose texts: study 
and analyse selections from a 
range of fictional poetry and prose 
texts, taken from Section B of the 
Edexcel Anthology. 
In practice, this piece could focus 
on no more than two texts (but it 
must be on more than one).
Assignment B
Imaginative writing: explore and 
develop imaginative writing skills.
The emphasis of this assignment 
is very much on your own ideas 
and ways of expressing yourself.
The coursework option of the English Language A course, also 
called Paper 3, provides an alternative to examination Paper 2 
and covers the same ground in different ways.
COURSEWORK OVERVIEW
The written coursework that you will complete for Paper 3 is worth 40 per 
cent of your total English Language marks (the same as Paper 2). You have 
to submit two assignments, (known as units). One based on Section B of the 
Edexcel Anthology, which will be assessed for your reading skills. The other 
will be a piece of personal imaginative writing, which is entirely your own work 
and which will be assessed your writing skills.
You must work under the guidance of your teacher, who is authorised to 
assess your coursework and who has to authenticate it, but your coursework 
is something that you are in charge of. It is vital that you do not copy or 
borrow writing from elsewhere and then pretend it is your own, and you will be 
required to sign a form stating that the work is your own.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
Coursework has many advantages.
 
◼
You have more time to plan, think about and improve your assignments.
 
◼
They do not have to be done under controlled conditions. 
 
◼
You have more freedom to choose what to write about and what to submit.
 
◼
Your coursework folder is solid evidence of what you can do in your own 
time and to the best of your abilities.
However, there are disadvantages too.
 
◼
Coursework may take up too much of your time. The two assignments 
together are worth 40 per cent of the GCSE, whereas the exam is worth 60 
per cent, so exam preparation must be given priority.
 
◼
You may be tempted to take short cuts. If you cheat and get found out, the 
penalties can be very severe. Teachers and moderators are very good at 
detecting plagiarism. It is simply not worth the risk. Furthermore, you learn 
nothing from cheating in terms of developing your writing skills. 
WORD COUNT
There is no definite requirement regarding the length of coursework pieces, 
except that they should be as long as they need to be. Most students' 
coursework units are between 450 and 1000 words, but the board advises that 
each assignment should be between 450 and 600 words in length. There is no 
penalty for exceeding this recommendation. However, the commentary part of 
Assignment A should be no more than 200 words.
The best guide is to think about your chosen purpose and or audience. If your 
unit fits both of these requirements, then it will be the right length.
▶
SUBJECT VOCABULARY
plagiarism taking someone else's work 
and passing it off as your own
UNDERSTANDING THE COURSEWORK 
OPTION
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.
