PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
319
PAPER 3
COURSEWORK OVERVIEW
319
AUTHENTICITY
Near the end of the course, you will be asked to sign a Coursework 
Authentication to confirm that you produced your coursework independently. 
Teachers are always warned to look out for signs of plagiarism or excessive 
assistance from others. You should therefore work independently, although it is 
a good idea to show others what you have written and ask for verbal feedback. 
If you are unsure, ask your teacher what level of feedback is appropriate.
PRESENTATION OF THE WORK
Each piece of coursework should contain your name, the date on which 
the work was completed, the mark awarded and a brief teacher comment 
justifying the mark. This comment should be based on the assessment criteria 
for the mark range awarded.
Coursework pieces may be handwritten or word-processed.
STANDARDISATION OF COURSEWORK
Towards the end of the course, Pearson Edexcel will request a sample of 
coursework to be sent to a Pearson Edexcel-appointed coursework moderator. 
The moderator will either confirm the marks awarded by the teachers in 
your centre or will adjust marks accordingly. English departments always 
standardise the marking by sharing out work from each class amongst all the 
teachers in the department, so that the marking of all the year group is 
consistent.
USING PREVIOUS CHAPTERS
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVES
The assessment objectives for the coursework and for Papers 1 and 2 are the 
same. This means that the chapter on the fiction texts from the Anthology will 
give you plenty of activities and information that can be used to help you with 
Assignment A. For example, if your assignment is to compare two Anthology 
texts in some way, you should work your way carefully through the activities 
on those texts, as they will give you ideas and quotations to use in your 
coursework.
Likewise, for Assignment B, all the activities for Paper 2 Section B: Imaginative 
writing (pages XXX–XXX) will be very helpful for your coursework. There are 
sections on generating ideas, plotting, characterisation, description, using 
monologues and dialogues, structure, and so on, which you will need to help 
you create a good story. The fiction stories in the Anthology may also help to 
give you inspiration. Look at the way that they: use technique and structure; 
handle character, situation, mood and theme; and so on.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVES
Reading (Assignment A):
AO1 Read and understand a variety 
of texts, selecting and interpreting 
information, ideas and perspectives
AO2 Understand and analyse how 
writers use linguistic and structural 
devices to achieve their effects
AO3 Explore links and connections 
between writers’ ideas and 
perspectives, as well as how these 
are conveyed.
Writing (Assignment B): 
AO4 Communicate effectively and 
imaginatively, adapting form, tone 
and register of writing for specific 
purposes and audiences
AO5 Write clearly, using a range of 
vocabulary and sentence structures, 
with appropriate paragraphing and 
accurate spelling, grammar and 
punctuation
Writing to explore, imagine and entertain also gives you a wide range of 
options, including stories, descriptions, and magazine or newspaper articles. If 
you decide to write an article, consult the section on articles in the section on 
transactional writing (pages XXX–XXX). However, remember that the purpose 
of the coursework is not to argue or explain but to explore or entertain.
People often write best when they can draw on their own experiences, such as 
a powerful memory or an eventful day. You could write to explore your feelings 
and thoughts, or you could use these experiences as part of an entertaining 
account or story. Your approach to this assignment can be light-hearted 
or deeply serious, and you can submit imaginative responses to any of the 
Anthology texts. 
SUBMITTING ASSIGNMENTS
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
320
PAPER 3
320
ASSIGNMENT A: POETRY AND PROSE TEXTS
You should aim to write roughly 500–600 words for Part 1 and about 200 
words for Part 2, the commentary. You will not be penalised for writing more 
for Part 1, but you will not be given more marks because you have written 
more; for Part 2, you must keep it short, since it is only worth 6 marks. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
This lesson will help you to:
 
◼
understand how to approach 
Assignment A (reading skills).
Your teacher will set you a task that requires you to write in 
response to any two or more poetry or prose texts from the 
Pearson Edexcel International GCSE English Anthology. You should 
choose the texts yourself. 
ASSIGNMENT A: POETRY AND PROSE TEXTS 
WORD COUNT
For Assignment A, you will write about texts from Section B of the Anthology. 
 
◼
‘Disabled’ by Wilfred Owen.
 
◼
‘Out, ––’ by Robert Frost.
 
◼
‘An Unknown Girl’ by Moniza Alvi.
 
◼
‘The Bright Lights of Sarajevo’ by Tony Harrison.
 
◼
‘Still I Rise’ by Maya Angelou.
 
◼
‘The Necklace’ by Guy de Maupassant.
 
◼
‘The Road Home’ by Rose Tremain.
 
◼
‘Whistle and I’ll Come to You’ by (from The Woman in Black), Susan Hill.
 
◼
‘Night’ by Alice Munro.
ANTHOLOGY POETRY AND PROSE 
TEXTS
THE QUESTION
The assignment could be a detailed analysis of the language in two texts, 
or it could focus on a theme that two texts have in common. The following 
questions are examples of questions.
 
▶ Discuss how the authors use language to present the situation and 
characters in ‘Night’ and ‘The Bright Lights of Sarajevo’.
 
▶ Consider any two texts about aspects of growing up. How do they approach 
their subject matter?
▶
PARTS OF THE ASSIGNMENT
Assignment A will be in two parts.
 
◼
Part 1 will be a response to the set assignment and will be MARKED out of 
24 marks, with 6 marks for AO1 and 18 marks for AO2. 
 
◼
Part 2 will be a short commentary explaining why you chose the texts 
THAT you discussed in the assignment. It is worth 6 marks for AO1. This is 
one of the reasons why you should choose the texts yourself.
There is therefore a total of 30 marks for this assignment, which corresponds 
to 20 per cent of the International GCSE in English Language. 
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
321
PAPER 3
321
ASSIGNMENT A: POETRY AND PROSE TEXTS
 
▶ Choose two poems. How do they use language to focus on a significant 
moment or incident?
All assignments for this unit must address the Assessment Objectives for 
reading. In simple terms, this means that you must:
 
◼
show that you have read your chosen texts thoroughly and understand 
them well enough to develop an interpretation
 
◼
show how language is used to achieve effects.
For this assignment, you must not submit:
 
◼
work based on Section A of the Anthology
 
◼
imaginative or empathetic responses to Section B texts (although these 
could be submitted for Assignment B).
TIPS ON THE READING 
ASSIGNMENT
1 ‘Analyse, not summarise’ is a useful motto to bear in mind. It is assumed 
that you could summarise the texts if you were asked to do so, but nobody 
is asking you to summarise.
2 Try to develop your own opinion on texts and think for yourself. Do not rely 
only on teacher’s notes. To access the higher grade bands, you have to 
develop a thorough and perceptive understanding of language and structure.
3 A key feature of higher-grade work is that it explores ‘how both language 
and structure are used by writers to achieve effects’. The word ‘explore’ 
implies that there is a value in trying to be fresh and individual in your 
approach. Make your points tentatively, considering different ideas and 
using phrases such as ‘this could be seen as…’, ‘on the other hand this may 
be…’, and ‘another meaning of this might be…’. This kind of writing shows 
that you are thinking about the texts and responding to them. Although you 
may misunderstand a text, it is equally true that there is no ‘right answer’ – 
only good and less good answers.
HINT
Remember that teachers and moderators 
are human beings and that they will 
respond to genuine engagement (that is, 
when students are doing their best to think 
for themselves). They will be less impressed 
by responses that show little individuality.
4 You must write about the language of the texts and how this helps to 
convey meaning and fulfil the writer’s purpose. Just as in the exams, it is 
always better to write in some detail about a few quotations, than to quote 
frequently but fail to comment in detail.
5 It is best to focus closely only on the two texts chosen, and not to bring in 
any other texts that you might think of.
6 You must back up all of your points with clearly relevant and well-explained 
evidence (think ‘P-E-E’!).
USING ACTIVITIES FROM 
PREVIOUS CHAPTERS
Once you have chosen the two pieces that you are going to write about, you 
need to work carefully through the pages on those pieces that you will find in 
the chapter on Paper 2.
Once you have done this, work through the lesson, ‘Putting it into practice’, on 
page XXX. On this page, you will find the following question.
 
▶ Look again at the poem ‘Electricity Comes to Cocoa Bottom’ and show how 
the poet presents the relationship between the physical environment and the 
events and feelings portrayed. 
This is an exam-style question, but you could adapt it to suit the coursework, 
substituting your chosen chosen texts and themes for ‘Electricity Comes to 
Cocoa Bottom’ and its themes. For example, you could ask the following 
question.
▲ Show that you have read your chosen texts 
thoroughly
Image: A close up of a nice fountain 
pen writing on high quality paper.
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.

PAPER 2
TEXT ANTHOLOGY: FICTION
322
PAPER 3
322
ASSIGNMENT A: POETRY AND PROSE TEXTS
 
▶ Show how the poet presents the relationship between the physical 
environment and the events and feelings being shown in two poems or texts: 
‘An Unknown Girl’ and ‘The Bright Lights of Sarajevo’.
Read through the following student answer to this question.
‘The Bright Lights of Sarajevo’ describes how, at night, in besieged and bomb-
damaged Sarajevo, the poet is surprised to find young people from different 
ethnic groups strolling about in the darkness, and how boys meet girls despite 
the danger and darkness, whilst also hinting at the violent events of the siege.
The poem shows us the paradoxes of wartime: how ethnic conflict is 
submerged at night; how romance can burst into life in a terrible and fearful 
environment; how tender or romantic feelings can exist in the same place 
where people were killed by shells earlier in the war. 
▼  QUOTATION: A DETAIL ABOUT 
THE CITY NOTICED BY 
HARRISON
▼  WHAT IT TELLS US ABOUT THE 
ENVIRONMENT
‘To get the refills they wheel home in 
prams’
Shows how the Sarajevans improvise with 
whatever they have to cope with in the 
situation
The language of the poem is mostly straightforward and even quite 
conversational. This helps to make the poem more realistic: it sounds 
spontaneous and is more accessible to us (especially perhaps to the first 
readers of the poem in The Guardian). Perhaps Harrison was trying to 
convey the sense that he was there, recording his on-the-spot impressions. 
Throughout the poem Harrison conveys the contrast between the activities of 
ordinary and peaceable Sarajevans, and the strange and difficult conditions 
in which they live, with evidence of large-scale violence all around them. The 
contrast is expressed in the language. Sometimes one phrase has associations 
or suggests a feeling very different from those of another.
▼  EVIDENCE: CONTRASTING WORDS 
OR PHRASES
▼  COMMENT ON THE EFFECT OF THE 
CONTRAST
4–6
‘Queuing for the… grams of 
bread / often dodging snipers on 
the way’
We are all used to queuing as an everyday 
activity, but the idea of being shot at as 
part of the routine is shocking.
As the poem goes on, we can see a group or chain of words associated with 
each other, which denote peaceful activities, but these contrast or clash with 
another chain of words associated with a wartime environment. The effect is 
to make us aware of how the people are doing their utmost to keep living in 
the midst of danger. You could say that the ideas of the poem are structured 
around this contrast. 
▲ In his depiction of Sarajevo and its 
inhabitants, Harrison brings out the 
contradictions of wartime
CONFIDENTIAL: Uncorrected WIP proof, NOT for circulation or distribution. © Pearson Education.
